<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Appendices</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="appendices" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendices</h2>
			<section id="appendices-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>. The Highland Emigration.</h3>
				<p>It is a curious coincidence that among the many experiences of her journey, Miss Schaw should have come into contact with a phase of that highland emigration which is a conspicuous feature of ScottishAmerican history just before the Revolutionary War. Between 1763 and 1776 there left Scotland many thousands of her people⁠—the total number is not known⁠—who had lived in towns, valleys, and islands of North Britain, from the southwest to the uttermost north, including the Hebrides, the Orkneys, and the Shetland Islands. They represented nearly all grades of the population⁠—tacksmen, farmers and other tenants, and laborers, and covered many gradations of wealth, from the substantial and prosperous chief tenants to the very poor, unable to maintain themselves and their families. These people, migrating at different times and under different conditions, seem all to have been attracted by the fertile and cheap lands of the New World and by the opportunities these lands offered of making a living. They went to nearly all the colonies, but chiefly to Nova Scotia, New York, and the Carolinas.</p>
				<p>The causes of this movement have never been adequately explained, although there is a great mass of evidence, printed and in manuscript, upon which a thorough study might be based. In general it was due to the breaking up of the clan organization and the transition from tribal to civil power and authority, constituting a veritable revolution in Scottish highland life in the eighteenth century. Three results followed: an increase of anarchy and crime; a substitution of money payments for payments in kind in rents and other transactions; and an increasing pressure of population upon the food supply. The landed proprietors or their chief tenants, the tacksmen, began to absorb small farms into large ones, evict tenants or raise rents, and harry the lesser folk with exactions and heavy oppressions, whereas the latter, bred to a farming and stock-raising life, were unable to find new forms of livelihood. The old linen manufacture was in decay, while the redundancy of population rendered stock and cattle raising and the time-honored methods of agriculture a precarious and insufficient means of subsistence. By witness of all whose testimony has been recorded, the chief cause of the movement was the rise of rents, and the difficulties of subsistence due to the enhanced cost of provisions and other necessaries of life. The situation was in many ways not unlike that which accompanied the enclosure movement in England in the sixteenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries.</p>
				<p>The emigrants complained of all of these conditions as making it impossible for them to remain in Scotland. “It is a grief to our spirits,” said one, “to leave our native land and venture upon such a dangerous voyage; but there is no help for it. We are not able to stand the high rents and must do something for bread or see our families reduced to beggary.” But just who were responsible for the situation is not so easy to determine. A recent writer has called attention to the fact that one cause of the emigration was the “tacksman system.” The tacksmen were chief tenants, often men of wealth and social standing, who held their lands of the proprietors or lords of the soil on long leases and were accustomed to “subset” these lands to undertenants. Both classes suffered, for while some of the tacksmen were among the oppressors, others, confronted with the prospect of heightened rents and lowered social position, themselves joined the movement and came to America, bringing with them not only much wealth, but also many of their lesser tenants, who followed them partly from motives of clan loyalty and partly in the hope of bettering their condition (Miss Adam, in The Scottish Historical Review, July, 1919).</p>
				<p>Among those who were driven from Scotland because of the increase of lawlessness and crime was James Hogg, who came to North Carolina in 1774. He agreed that “others complain, with too much justice, of arbitrary and oppressive services, of racked rents and cruel taskmasters,” but declared that in his case he and his family were compelled to leave because of “the barbarity of the country,” meaning thereby the theft and pilfering of his crops and stock by the people of the neighborhood, the burning of his house and other buildings, and the threats which were made against his own life. “A list of the murders, robberies, and thefts,” he wrote, “committed with impunity there during my residence in Caithness, would surprise a Mohawk or a Cherokee. The loss of so many people and the numbers they may in time draw after them will probably be missed by the landholders, but let them learn to treat their fellow creatures with more humanity. Instead of looking on myself as an enemy to my country in being accessory to the carrying off so many people, I rejoice in being an instrument in the hand of Providence to punish oppression which is by far too general, and I am glad to understand that already some of those haughty landlords now find it necessary to court and caress those same poor people, whom they lately despised and treated as slaves or beasts of burden” (Scots Magazine, 36, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 345⁠–⁠346).</p>
				<p>Miss Schaw’s fear that the emigration of so many able-bodied men would have a bad effect on recruiting was realized during the American War, when the obtaining of soldiers from Scotland, always a fertile field for the recruiting sergeant, became exceedingly and increasingly difficult.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>. The Martin Family.</h3>
				<p>(Colonel Samuel Martin, of whom Miss Schaw gives an engaging account, was well called the “Father of Antigua,” for he was born on the island in the last decade of the seventeenth century, and except for three trips to England, covering probably less than ten years in all, lived continuously there until the very eve of the Revolution. Thus his long life of more than eighty years was coincident with the most important period in the history of the colony, and touched at many points its industrial, social, and political development.</p>
				<p>The Martins came originally from Ireland, some of its members migrating early to Surinam and the West Indies, and settling finally, in the seventeenth century, in Antigua. Many of the later members returned to England, and as officials under government or officers in the army and navy rose to eminence in their professions, a few attaining the honors of knighthood. Others went to the American continent, to Boston, New York, and North Carolina, becoming representative men of their communities, and acquiring, as a rule, ample wealth, wherewith to maintain social positions commensurate with their prominence. The family as a whole got widely scattered during the colonial period, but its members never lost their regard for Antigua, retaining property there, and manifesting interest in its welfare and a desire to be of service to its people whenever the occasion arose. In England the most prominent sons of the family dwelt in or near London, in Surrey, Dorset, Herts, and Berks, where, supported in part from the income of their Antigua plantations, they possessed country seats and lived the lives of country gentlemen. Wherever Martins resided, whether at “Green Castle” in Antigua, “Rockhall” in Long Island, or in England at Ashtead in Surrey, Great Canford in Dorset, or “White Knights” near Reading, they were of more than ordinary influence and importance. Some of them rose to positions of high distinction, particularly in the navy.</p>
				<p>Because of the meagre records of the time, the various members of the family are not always easy to identify, and, in consequence, much confusion has resulted among those who have endeavored to deal with the family genealogy. In three generations there were five Josiahs, and in four generations, six Samuels; and in addition there were others bearing the same names, who do not appear to have belonged to this particular Martin line at all. Even with all the available evidence before us, there are still some difficulties that cannot be surmounted.</p>
				<p>Colonel Martin’s father, also a Samuel, was the son of Samuel Martin of Dublin county, Ireland, fourth in descent from a Josiah Martin of the same place (Debrett, Baronetage, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1840, <abbr>p.</abbr> 374). He was probably born in Surinam, but appears in Antigua as early as 1678. He soon became one of the conspicuous men of the island, an ensign and major in the militia, a member of the assembly, of which he was speaker in 1689, a councillor, treasurer and collector of imposts, and, toward the end of his life, member of a committee to compile a body of laws. In 1699 he is spoken of as “of great estate, good sence, and repute.” That he lacked the urbanity and instinctive kindliness of nature which Miss Schaw noted in his son, appears from the severity of his attitude toward his slaves, by whom he was murdered on Christmas Day, 1701. “We have lost a very useful man in Major Martin,” wrote Governor Codrington. “I am afraid he was guilty of some unusual act of severity or rather some indignity toward the Coromantes, the best and most faithful of our slaves.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a> Though the young Samuel was but a child when this tragic event took place, he must have been deeply impressed by its significance, for Miss Schaw presents a pleasing picture of the large troop of healthy negroes upon the “Green Castle” plantation⁠—numbering about three hundred at this time⁠—cheerfully performing the tasks imposed by a kind and beneficent master, a prince of subjects rather than an owner of slaves. Many of them had been freed, as Miss Schaw says, and others were freed later by Martin in his will.</p>
				<p>Of Colonel Martin’s life we have but a slender outline. He was born about 1690⁠—the exact date being uncertain, because statements differ as to the age at which he died⁠—and he died in Antigua in November, 1776, a little less than two years after Miss Schaw’s visit. His early career is obscure, owing to the presence of more than one Samuel Martin on the island, but he seems to have been the Samuel of “Five Islands” plantation, who was major of militia in 1707 and of the troop of mounted horse or carabineers in 1712. In 1716 he was elected to the assembly and, except for a trip to England in 1716-1717, continued to serve either as deputy or speaker until he again left the colony in 1729. He married, before 1714, Frances Yeamans, daughter of John Yeamans, the deputy governor (1693⁠–⁠1711), but she died and he married, as his second wife, Sarah Wyke, the daughter of Edward Wyke, deputy governor of Montserrat, and widow of William Irish of the same island. His fourth child, Henry, the second son by his second wife, was born in Dorset, England, in 1733, so he probably remained in England on his second visit for a number of years. Soon after his return he must have been commissioned a colonel of militia, for Miss Schaw tells us that in 1772 he had been head of the militia “upwards of forty years.” In 1750 he was again elected to the assembly and chosen speaker at its first session. From this time forward, living on his “Green Castle” plantation in New Division, which was picturesquely located in Bermudian Valley under Windmill Hill (Davy’s West Indies, <abbr>p.</abbr> 408), he led an increasingly peaceful and prosperous life, resigning his place as speaker in 1763, and his seat in the assembly in 1768. At the urgent request of his children, three of whom, Samuel, Jr., Henry, and William Byam, had been living there for a number of years (a nephew, William, was a business man in London), he went to England, when nearly eighty years of age, doubtless with the expectation of spending his declining years there. But as he told Miss Schaw, he could not stand “the dreary climate.” He spent his time partly in Surrey and partly in Dorset, and at the former place, August 13, 1773, made his will, adding codicils and generally settling his affairs. He must have returned to Antigua soon afterwards, glad to get back, as he himself said, to the “warm sunshine” of his semitropical island. He died on the island, where he had been born, and where he had spent more than three score and ten of the more than four score years of his life. His only venture into the field of authorship, as far as we know, is a pamphlet entitled An Essay upon Plantership, humbly inscribed to his Excellency George Thomas, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, Chief Governor of All the Leeward Islands, As a Monument to Ancient Friendship, which was written in Antigua and first published there about 1755. A third edition was issued in London in 1763, and a fourth, a work of sixty-two pages, in 1765. The treatise shows Colonel Martin to have been a model planter and a high-minded, considerate master.</p>
				<p>Colonel Martin, according to his own statement, had twenty-three children, but of this number it is impossible to give the names of more than seven: Samuel, Jr., and Henrietta, children by his first wife, and George, Henry, Josiah, William Byam, and Fanny, children by his second wife. That many of his children died young is probable, and that others may be found among the many Martins whose names appear in the records of Antigua and neighboring islands, is equally likely.</p>
				<p>Samuel, Jr., his eldest son, was born in Antigua, September 1, 1714. He went to England when but a lad, possibly accompanying his father on the latter’s second trip in 1729, in order to be educated, as there were no educational facilities in Antigua. He was entered at the Inner Temple about 1740, and became a bencher in 1747, continuing in residence until 1761. From 1742 to 1744 he served as deputy agent for the colony, while his cousin, John Yeamans, appointed agent in 1727, was absent on leave in Antigua; and in 1744 he was recommended by Yeamans as his successor, but the recommendation was not acted on by the colony. He became a member of parliament from the borough of Camelford in Cornwall, 1747⁠–⁠1768, and from the Cinque Port Hastings, 1768⁠–⁠1774, both controlled boroughs, and he took some part in parliamentary business. His most important post was that of first secretary to the Treasury Board, to which he was appointed in 1756, serving until 1762, and in which he must have had a great deal to do with the distribution of the money appropriated by parliament to recompense the continental colonies for their services and expenditures in the French and Indian War.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> He became treasurer to the Princess Dowager of Wales, possibly after the death of the prince in 1751, and continued to serve in that capacity until the death of the princess in 1772, “a long service,” he calls it in his will. In the latter year, possibly to compensate for the loss of his office, he was granted an annuity of £1,200 out of the four and a half percent duty, until a grant in reversion of the office of usher of H. M. Exchequer, a post paying about £4,000 a year, should take place. But he died before he could profit from the emoluments of the office, which had been enjoyed since 1738 by Horace Walpole, the wit and letter writer, who survived him by nine years. He does not appear to have held any government position during the years after 1772; but we occasionally get glimpses of various business activities, by means of which he may have added to an income already large. He had a small estate, “Marshalswyck,” near <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans, Herts, where he was living in retirement in 1780, when sixty-six years of age; and another in Dorset, possibly near Great Canford, about two miles southeast from Wimborne minster on the south side of the river Stour. While in London, after 1761, he lived in Queen Street, Westminster, until 1777, and afterwards at 84 Pall Mall. He died November 20, 1788, and was buried in Great Canford churchyard, where there is a tablet of white marble, placed by his executors, his brothers Henry and William Byam, and his intimate friend Ralph Willet of Merly, with the inscription, we “loved him when living and lament him now dead” (Hutchins, Dorset, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, 310).</p>
				<p>When Colonel Martin, the father, said to Miss Schaw, “my eldest son you know by character at least,” and Miss Schaw in reply expressed her admiration for that character, both were probably referring to Samuel’s chief claims to the remembrance of posterity⁠—his duel with John Wilkes and his friendship for Hogarth, who painted his portrait.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a> Though Hogarth’s biographers mention the portrait, none of them have identified Martin or have been able to give any of the circumstances under which it was painted. Hogarth retained the portrait during his lifetime, and left it to Martin in his will, and Martin in turn left it to his brother, William Byam. The date when it was painted is uncertain and its present whereabouts are unknown. It is probable that the duel with Wilkes grew in some way out of Martin’s acquaintance with Hogarth and the latter’s quarrel with Wilkes and Churchill, 1762⁠–⁠1764, for it took place at the same time, although its immediate cause was Wilkes’s attack upon Martin in the North Briton (March, 1763), in which he stigmatized him as “a mean, abject, low-lived, and dirty fellow” (Bleackley’s Life of Wilkes, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 132⁠–⁠133, and for the duel, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 135⁠–⁠137).</p>
				<p>During the period after 1772, Martin performed a number of services for his Antiguan and North Carolinian friends and was useful in furthering the claims of some of the Loyalists before the commission. Thomas Macknight applied to him with letters from his brother, Governor Josiah Martin (Dartmouth Papers, letter of July 24, 1781), and there is a paper in the Public Record Office bearing Samuel’s comments on Josiah’s own claims for compensation and a pension. In these comments, Martin suggested that the Treasury grant Josiah a post in the recently organized government of Bengal. Though nothing came of the suggestion, it is interesting to note that Josiah’s son, Josiah, born in North Carolina in 1772, was afterwards appointed register of the court of appeals at Benares, a post that he was filling at the time of his death in 1799 (Gentleman’s Magazine, 1799, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1087).</p>
				<p>Samuel’s half-brother Henry, second son of Colonel Samuel by his second wife and the progenitor of the present English line, was born in England in 1733, and as far as we know never visited Antigua. He early rose to prominence in naval circles, being for many years naval commissioner at Portsmouth. In 1790 he was appointed comptroller of the navy, one of the four principal officers of the Navy Board, an office which he retained until his death. He was knighted July 28, 1791, and died August 1, 1794. He lived in Harley Street, London, but died apparently in Dorset, possibly at Great Canford. He inherited “Green Castle” from his father, and had lands also in Ireland and England. He had four sons and four daughters: the eldest son, Samuel, died in 1782; his second, Sir Henry, who attained no special distinction, died in 1842; his third, Josiah, was collector of customs in Antigua, succeeding the “Young Martin,” mentioned in the text, and died in 1849; his fourth, Thomas By am, afterwards Sir Thomas, who became an admiral in the navy and whose biography is given in the Dictionary of National Biography, died in 1854. The members of this family in no way concern us here.</p>
				<p>Colonel Samuel’s fourth son was Josiah, the governor of North Carolina, who played an important part in the events leading to the Revolution, and is mentioned a number of times in Miss Schaw’s narrative, though it is doubtful if she ever met him personally. To North Carolina historians he has been but a fleeting figure, and they have been but little concerned to find out whence he came or whither he went after he left the colony. It is worth while, therefore, to give a sketch of his life, as far as the details can be recovered.</p>
				<p>Josiah was born in Antigua in 1737 and was probably named for his uncle, whose daughter he afterwards married. He joined the local militia in 1754, at the age of seventeen, but in 1757 entered the regular army as ensign of the 4th Foot. In November, 1758, he was commissioned lieutenant and on August 11, 1761, was bracketed with Charles Lee, of unsavory reputation, as major in the iO3d or Volunteer Hunters. The next year, 1762, he was commissioned lieutenant colonel of the 22nd Foot, afterwards Gage’s regiment, but in 1764 was transferred to the 68th, which was located in Antigua from 1764 to 1772. On account of ill health, he sold his commission in 1769 and retired from active military service. Just where he was stationed during these years is not easy to ascertain, but he must have spent part of his time in Long Island, where he married his wife; part in London, where Miers, a London jeweller and portrait painter, painted his portrait (a miniature); and part in Antigua, whither he went in 1764. There he was appointed by Governor Thomas a member of the council, in place of Arthur Freeman, whom Thomas had suspended for running away with his daughter, and he retained that position, nominally at least, until Freeman’s return from England in 1771. In 1761 he married his cousin Elizabeth (apparently five years his senior), the daughter of his uncle Josiah by his first wife, a <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Chester, and probably both before and after that event lived at “Rockhall,” Josiah’s countryseat in Long Island. He must have resided there again after resigning his commission in 1769, perhaps for two years. On December 14, 1770, he was named governor of North Carolina, through the influence of Governor Tryon, and on May 1, 1771, received his commission and instructions from England, through Lord Dunmore. He was delayed in Long Island by continued ill health and did not reach the province until July 11 of that year, holding the first meeting of his council on August 12. Samuel Johnston of North Carolina wrote to Thomas Barker, June 10, 1771, “We are in daily expectation of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Martin our new Governor, and as we hear a very amiable character of him are not uneasy at the approaching change” (Letter in North Carolina Historical Commission files).</p>
				<p>Josiah was resident governor of North Carolina until 1776. He made a tour of the colony with his family and retinue in 1772, reaching Hillsboro in July, and although he endeavored to adjust the difficulties arising out of the Regulators’ War, he was only moderately successful. Temperamentally he was not well fitted to deal with the unrest of the period, and has always been harshly judged, not only by North Carolina historians, but also by all whose sympathies are with the revolutionary party. He was energetic, conscientious, and loyal to the cause which he upheld, but he lacked wisdom and the spirit of compromise, and saw in the colonial movement, as did Miss Schaw herself, only an exhibition of contumacy and sedition. His letters are long and his style is turgid and tiresome. He adhered inflexibly to the constitutional rights of the prerogative, and, believing that force was the only remedy to apply in the case, he suffered the fate of those who endeavor to coerce rather than to control an uprising based on legitimate grievances. He showed unquestioned ability and laid his plans with shrewdness and skill, but the breaks in the game went against him. When his first efforts to obtain military assistance failed, he fled before the rising storm, and somewhat to the discredit of his valor, if not of his discretion, escaped from New Bern on May 24, 1775, and took refuge, first at Fort Johnston (June 2), and then on board the Cruizer in the Cape Fear River (June 18 or 19). He remained in the province (on the ships of war) “for the sake of correspondence with the friends of government,” and not only organized a corps of Highlanders for an attack upon Wilmington (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>, 616⁠–⁠617), but also formulated elaborate plans, which in the autumn of 1775 he sent to Lord Dartmouth in England, by Miss Schaw’s brother, Alexander⁠—plans providing for a combined attack of land and sea forces for the purpose of reducing to subjection the Southern colonies. On January 10, 1776, he removed from the Cruizer to the Scorpion, and from that vantage point inaugurated the highland campaign, which ended in the defeat of the Highlanders at Moore’s Creek bridge on February 27, 1776. In March he changed to the transport Peggy, and when Sir Henry Clinton and Admiral Warren, who arrived during the spring, decided that further effort was useless, he accompanied them to Charles Town and remained there on the transport during June and most of July. With his departure from the province his governorship came to an actual, though not a legal, end. In his memorial presented to the Loyalist Claims Commission, he said that he never acted as governor after his flight from New Bern; but we know that he issued a proclamation from Charlotte in October, 1780, when he was with Lord Cornwallis’s army (Connor, History of North Carolina, I, 469) and that he continued to receive his salary until October, 1783 (The Royal Commission on the Losses and Services of the American Loyalists, Roxburghe Club, <abbr>p.</abbr> 290).</p>
				<p>Toward the end of July, 1776, anxious to see his family, and knowing that for the time being there was nothing more for him to do in the South, Martin went to New York on the Sovereign and “for the sake of rendering immediate service” remained there for nearly three years, living with the family at “Rockhall.” During this time his property in North Carolina, real and personal, was sold by order of the congress at New Bern, February 6, 1777. What his employments were during this period we do not know. He was certainly not the “<abbr>Lt.</abbr> <abbr>Col.</abbr> Martin” who presided at a court-martial in New York, March 27, 1778 (Order Book of the Three Battalions of Loyalists commanded by Oliver DeLancey, 1776⁠–⁠1778), for he was no longer of military rank; but he was the “Josiah Martin” appointed a member of the Board of Associated Loyalists in October, 1780 (American Manuscripts in the Royal Institution, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 198), though he can have had little or nothing to do with the work of that board. In the autumn of 1779, he accompanied Clinton on the latter’s second expedition to South Carolina (“at the desire of Sir Hy Clinton, who proposed to make him governor of S. Carolina when conquered but found his commission did not enable him to do so,” Public Record Office, C. O. 5:318) and the next year (August, 1780) he joined Cornwallis’s army and served as a volunteer until April, 1781. He made a number of efforts to return to military command, but without success. Those of his former highland regiment who served under Cornwallis endeavored to raise a regiment of their countrymen, of which Martin was to be colonel, but the results were unsatisfactory, as only about a hundred men returned to the colors, and these, in two companies, under Captain Forbes at Charles Town in 1781, and Captain McArthur at Fort Arbuthnot in 1782, were compelled to remain on guard duty (Ross, Cornwallis Correspondence, I, 54; Loyalist Muster Rolls, <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, 1777⁠–⁠1783).</p>
				<p>Cornwallis thought well of Martin and spoke highly of his services. “In opening up channels of correspondence with our friends in North Carolina,” he wrote to Lord George Germain, “I have been greatly assisted by <abbr>Gov.</abbr> Martin, from whose abilities and zeal for the service I have on many occasions derived great advantage” (August 20, 1780). “<abbr>Gov.</abbr> Martin became again a military man,” he wrote to the same after the battle of Camden, “and behaved with the spirits of a young volunteer” (August 21, 1780). “I have constantly received the most zealous assistance from <abbr>Gov.</abbr> Martin during my command in the southern districts,” he again wrote (March 17, 1781). “Hoping that his presence would tend to incite the loyal subjects of this province to take an active part with us, he has cheerfully submitted to the fatigue and dangers of our campaigns; but his delicate constitution has suffered by his public spirit, for, by the advice of the physician, he is now obliged to return to England for the recovery of his health” (Ross, Cornwallis Correspondence, I, 489, 494, 509).</p>
				<p>In April, 1781, after the battle of Guilford, Martin, suffering from increasing ill health, left Cornwallis’s army and returned to his family at “Rockhall.” There he spent a part of the summer, after which, with his wife, a son, and three daughters, he set sail for England. In London he presented his claims to the American Loyalist Claims Commission, and in memorials⁠—one of which was supported by the “observations” of his brother Samuel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a>⁠—and in evidence given personally in the presence of the board, he made statements of his losses. His salary, he said, with the perquisites of the governor’s office, was worth from £1,700 to £1,800 a year; his furniture he valued at £2,400 to £2,500, his books at £500 to £600; and his horses, two carriages, and the lands which he as governor had granted to himself and his children (10,000 acres) were worth altogether £3,500. The Treasury had been paying him his salary of £1,000 since July, 1775, and a temporary pension of £500, but the board decided that as long as the salary was paid the allowance should cease. Until October, 1783, therefore, Martin had his salary, but after that date the £500 allowance seems to have been his only payment from the British Exchequer, except the compensation for losses, which was placed at £2,100. In 1785, Martin reported that he had received only £840 of that amount (Audit Office Papers).</p>
				<p>There is nothing to show that Martin engaged in any occupation under government or in any way concerned himself with public affairs after he returned to England. Probably his health forbade active work. He performed useful services in behalf of members of the highland regiment that he had raised in 1775⁠–⁠1776, and he wrote recommendations and appeared before the board personally in behalf of their claims. In 1782 he was living in South Molton Street (off Oxford Street) and later resided at 56 James Street and in New Norfolk Street (Grosvenor Square). He died intestate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a> at the latter place in March, 1786, at the age of forty-nine, and was buried in <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s, Hanover Square. Miers, as has been noted, painted his miniature some time before 1771, for which Martin said that he sat fifty times (Copley-Pelham Letters, <abbr>p.</abbr> 128). It cost him thirty guineas, and Copley, who saw it, told Henry Pelham that he thought it well worth the money. Copley himself in 1771, going from New York to “Rockhall” specially for the purpose, painted a portrait of Mary Elizabeth, Martin’s eldest daughter, at that time eight or nine years old, with a dog, a picture that is not included in Bayley’s list of Copley paintings. This portrait was originally painted on canvas and set in the chimney piece over the mantel in the back parlor, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hewlett, who bought “Rockhall” in 1824, had it taken out and framed lest it be injured by damp and mould (letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hewlett’s granddaughter, Louise Hewlett Patterson). All together Martin had eight children, Mary Elizabeth, born in Long Island, 1762, two daughters born either in Long Island or in Antigua between 1762 and 1769, Sarah, born in Antigua about 1769, Alice, born in Long Island about 1770, Samuel, born in Long Island, 1771, Josiah, born in North Carolina, 1772, and Augusta, born in Long Island, 1775. Little Sammy and two unnamed daughters died in North Carolina, and Augusta died in England before 1788. The others were all living in 1795, Josiah dying unmarried in 1799. Of the mother’s death we know certainly but little.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a> Payson says that she died at the age of forty-four, in October, 1778, a month before her father (Oliver, Antigua, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, 441; New England Historical and Genealogical Register, <abbr>Jan.</abbr>, 1900).</p>
				<p>Colonel Samuel’s next younger brother, Josiah, the uncle of Governor Josiah, with whom he has frequently been confounded, was born in Antigua in 1699. He lived in the island during his earlier years and from his rank in the militia was often known as Major Martin. If, as the records of <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s parish, Hempstead, seem to show, his daughter Elizabeth was born in Long Island in 1732, two facts, not otherwise known, come to light. First, that Elizabeth was the daughter of his first wife and so half-sister to his other children; and second that Josiah himself must have gone with his wife to Long Island as early as 1730⁠–⁠1732.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a> If he was present in Long Island before 1732, he must have returned soon to Antigua, for his marriage to his second wife, Mary Yeamans, a niece of his brother’s first wife, on May 8, 1735, is to be found in the register of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s parish, and in the same year he was appointed a member of the council there. He must have acquired land in Long Island early, for “Major Martin’s lands” are mentioned in the Hempstead Records in 1742. He was a justice of the peace and notary public in Antigua in 1741 and president of the council from 1743 to 1746. In 1749 he was given twelve months’ leave of absence, and at that time must have made up his mind to leave the island permanently. His name appears in the Hempstead records in 1751, as subscribing £20 for erecting a gallery in the parish church (Onderdonk, Antiquities of the Parish Church, Hempstead, <abbr>p.</abbr> 11; Annals of Hempstead, <abbr>p.</abbr> 76). He purchased land in 1761 at the head of Cow Bay (Far Rockaway) and there must have erected his mansion, “Rockhall,” soon after.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a> In 1755, he was recorded as possessing six slaves, the largest number but one in a list of that date, and it is probable that he was a man of wealth, though holding no remunerative official post or engaging, as far as we know, in any business other than that of a country gentleman.</p>
				<p>In the very few biographical statements that have been made regarding Josiah Martin the elder, we are told that he was aide-decamp to Lieutenant Governor DeLancey in 1757, but that is wholly unlikely, as he was fifty-eight years old at the time, and the reference must be to Josiah Martin the younger. We are also told that he was on the council of the governor of the province of New York from 1759 to 1764, and that statement is probably correct, for he is called “<abbr>Hon.</abbr>” in the notice of his death, a title indicating membership in the council, and in the legislative journal the name is entered followed by “<abbr>Esq.</abbr>,” a style that would hardly have been used had the Josiah Martin in question been an officer in the regular army. Yet the matter is made perplexing by the fact that in the Privy Council Register he is spoken of as no longer of the council because he had “settled at Antigua” (Acts of the Privy Council, Colonial, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, 493), and it was the nephew, not the uncle, who went to Antigua in 1764. Whichever it was, this particular Josiah Martin was not of much use as a councillor, for he was present at but five meetings of the council in five years (Journal of the Legislative Council, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 1371, 1372, 1402, 1417, 1428). He died, November 21, 1778, at “Rockhall” and was buried in the chancel of <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Church, of which he was long a member. His will mentions six children, Samuel, Charles Yeamans, William, Elizabeth, Alice, and Rachel, and we know that he had one other son, Josiah, who died in 1762, after graduating at the College of Philadelphia (University of Pennsylvania), A.B. 1757, A.M. 1760, and after he had been entered at the Inner Temple, London. His wife died in 1825, having lived during her later years in a house left her by her son in his will and which stood on the site of the Astor House in New York.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a></p>
				<p>The eldest surviving son of Josiah the elder was Samuel, born in 1740 (baptized, October 14, in <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Church, Hempstead), who became a doctor, but from what medical school he obtained his diploma we do not know. He was a loyalist and in 1776 was implicated in a plot to overthrow the revolutionary government in New York. On February 17, 1776, he was compelled to give a bond of £500 to behave peaceably and refrain from harboring Tories in his house. Later his name was placed on the list of suspects, and in June he was summoned before the committee for hearing and trying disaffected persons. When interrogated he said that he had never done anything against the country and was not an enemy to America; that he always meant to remain as peaceable and inactive as he could. On being asked whether the British parliament had a right to tax America, he replied that in his opinion it had no right to levy internal taxes on the colonies. On being further asked what he meant by an internal tax, he answered a land tax, not a personal tax, which was not unconstitutional if for the regulation of trade, but, he added, he was not a politician and had confined his studies to his profession. Asked if he would give security, said that he would and named his father living on Long Island. The committee resolved unanimously that Samuel Martin was not a friend to the American cause, but after a further interrogation on June 26 accepted his parole and did not molest him during the war (Force, American Archives, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 1776, ff. 1153, 1160, 1175, 1176)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a></p>
				<p>Martin continued to live at “Rockhall,” serving for many years as vestryman of <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Church, and exercising considerable local influence. In 1773 he was recommended by the Royal Society “to make researches and collections in the branches of Natural History in America” (Home Office Papers, 1773⁠–⁠1775’ §127) and so must have acquired something of a reputation in England. He never married. His death took place on April 19, 1806, and he was buried under the chancel of the old <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Church. When the first church was burned and its successor placed on a slightly different site his grave remained unmarked. At his death Samuel left instructions that all the family papers should be sent to his brother Charles in England. Whether or not they are still in existence we do not know.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>. “Olivees” and the Hamiltons.</h3>
				<p>Miss Schaw visited the Hamiltons at the height of their happiness and prosperity, before the clouds of the American War had begun to cast their ominous shadows and darken the scene. Her account possesses great charm and vivacity and presents a delightful picture of “Olivees” at its best, glowing with hospitality and life. There, as elsewhere, Miss Schaw was aroused to an enthusiastic appreciation of all that she saw and enjoyed, and was manifestly impressed by the reception she met with from old and new friends alike. Undoubtedly these circumstances added vastly to her pleasure and led her at times to indulge in roseate views of the islands that are not always borne out by the accounts of others, though none deny that West Indian plantation life, in the heyday of its existence, was socially of a luxurious and convivial character.</p>
				<p>Lady Isabella Erskine and William Leslie Hamilton were married in England in 1770, and immediately afterwards sailed for the West Indies, where the latter, receiving his legal education at the Middle Temple, had been admitted to practice as a lawyer in 1767. He must have been older than Miss Schaw thought he was, for if he were but twenty-six or twenty-seven in January, 1775^ he would have been but twelve or thirteen when entered at the Middle Temple in 1761, but eighteen or nineteen when called to the bar in 1767, and less than twenty-five when chosen speaker of the house. Such precocity is possible but hardly credible. Immediately upon arrival the bride and groom took up their residence at the splendid plantation “Olivees,” belonging to Hamilton’s sister, who allowed them to occupy the estate rent free, and to enjoy without charge the services of the negroes and (within certain limits) the products of the plantation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> The latter lay pleasantly and coolly situated on the high ground a mile from Basseterre, two or three hundred feet above the level of the sea. It stood “on a well raised stone terrace, paved with marble and had spacious open galeries and verandahs.” The “great hall,” of which Miss Schaw speaks, was a large, finely proportioned room, which ran the entire length of the front, with a handsome deep cornice and ample doors, both of dark mahogany, and a paneling of the same wood. It constituted the great reception and dining-room, the scene of lavish entertainment and hospitality. In addition the house had a drawing-room and bedchambers finished and furnished in English style. The estate comprised 283 acres, 151 of which were cane land and 132 pasture, and taken as a whole was esteemed the finest in all the West Indies. In later years it fell very much into disrepair, and Davy reported in 1846 that the whole might then be bought for £3,000, which was less than the original cost of the house (West Indies, <abbr>p.</abbr> 463).</p>
				<p>Until 1777 the Hamiltons lived at “Olivees” in affluence, the social leaders of the southern part of the island; but in the same year they removed to Basseterre that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hamilton might the more efficiently perform his duties as the deputy solicitor-general of the islands. There they remained, burdened with the increasing expenses of town life and the obligations which the war of the American Revolution imposed, until, in 1779, Lady Belle left the island and returned to England; and the next year, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hamilton, broken in health, obtained leave of absence and followed her, but died in London, in October, 1780, four days after his arrival. Their last years in <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts were a time of anxiety and financial embarrassment. As deputy solicitor-general and afterwards attorney-general, Hamilton was responsible for the peace and good order of the islands and in consequence became involved in many important and expensive undertakings for the purpose of thwarting the revolutionary influence. There was a powerful radical party in <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, which Governor Burt characterized as “factious, disappointed, and GalloAmerican principled,” for (he adds) the president of the council, Craister Greatheed, “suffered them to do in a manner as they pleased and escaped [trouble]. By two years’ relaxation of government and acquiescence (1775⁠–⁠1777)5 distraction and American principles and attachments took head. I had them to combat; your Lordship may rest satisfied I will eradicate these monsters or fall in the contest” (letter of <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 25, 1778). In the same letter he speaks of the extremes to which the madness of the assembly had gone, and reports that some say “the King’s instructions are not binding on them.” Later (<abbr>Oct.</abbr> 25, 1780) he writes: “The disposition of that assembly, as well as of others in this part of the world, having caught the infection from America and [being] deeply tinged with the principles of Republicanism, attempt bringing all to a level and assume privileges to which I cannot think them constitutionally, I am certain they are not from the mode of government hitherto, entitled.”</p>
				<p>Such were the conditions, undoubtedly much exaggerated by Governor Burt, under which Hamilton performed his duties, first as the deputy solicitor-general and then as the attorney-general of the Leeward Islands. Had Miss Schaw visited <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher two years later (she was there in January, 1775), she might have had a different tale to tell, a tale not unlike that which she told for North Carolina. Hamilton was called upon to repress the trade in arms which was taking place between the North American colonies and the Dutch island of <abbr>St.</abbr> Eustatius; for, as Burt wrote, the Dutch governor, De Graaff, did all in his power “to support and countenance the Rebels and French” and connived at trade in munitions of war and the fitting out of privateers (<abbr>cf.</abbr> also American Historical Review, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, 693⁠–⁠695).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a> As Governor Burt had no available fund for this purpose, Hamilton’s purse was resorted to on all occasions, and his money used for the carrying on of correspondence with the governor, the hiring of vessels, the securing of information, and the furnishing of aid to the commanders of the British fleet in West Indian waters. Hamilton was also frequently required to entertain officers of the squadron, at one time receiving the wife of Admiral Cumming as a member of his family for more than a year (1777⁠–⁠1778), and in other ways becoming involved in expenditures which seriously depleted his fortune. He suffered also heavy losses. The expense of living at Basseterre was considerably more than at the plantation, and on account of his official duties he was obliged to give up his private practice, thus incurring a total loss of income amounting to £9,000 sterling. Before leaving the island in 1780, he shipped to England goods⁠—clothing, tea, Nankin china, plate, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—worth £2,500, but the vessel was captured by the French and his property seized as prize of war. Lady Belle, in one of her memorials, says that a part of the plate was seen afterwards on the sideboard of the Marquis de Bouille (French governor in the Antilles), “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> the American agent, winking at the outrage.” Some of the tea and china, she says further, was sent to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Washington; and later in London when she entertained <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingham at her table and reminded him of the stolen property, he acknowledged the obligation and in recompense offered her land in America.</p>
				<p>All together Hamilton’s losses were estimated at £15,000, a sum which apparently did not include the value of the property captured by the French.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a> In the years from 1803 to 1809, Lady Belle, then Countess of Glencairn, petitioned the government for compensation. She presented several memorials and a number of statements from persons familiar with the circumstances, among them two from William Knox, who testified that when undersecretary of state he knew of Hamilton’s services and could say that no remuneration had been given. Nelson, who had been with the fleet in the West Indies in 1777⁠–⁠1778, visited the countess at Mollard’s Hotel, Dover Street, in September, 1805, just before leaving England for the last time, and there approved of her claim and testified to the value of Hamilton’s information and help to the naval commanders. Lord Thurlow, the lord chancellor, “who honoured Lord Glencairn and myself with his particular regards,” also rendered assistance in determining the amount of the claim. Unfortunately Lady Belle was unable to make out accurate accounts of disbursements, because all of Hamilton’s papers were lost, when the ship on which they were despatched foundered at sea. (Governor Hurt’s letters and accompanying papers are in the Public Record Office, C. O. 152:58⁠–⁠60; the memorials of the countess and corroborative statements in the same series, volumes 84, 94.)</p>
				<p>Hamilton’s case shows that the Loyalists on the American continent were not the only ones who suffered in the American revolution.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-4" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>. Brunswick.</h3>
				<p>The town of Brunswick, which lay about twelve miles within the bar of the Cape Fear River, was located on the lands of Maurice and Roger Moore, upon high ground along the western bank. Maurice Moore, the chief promoter, had come from South Carolina in 1719, had settled at first in Chowan county on Albemarle Sound, and in 1722 had taken up lands on the Cape Fear. In 1725 he “caused a plot or plan containing 360 acres of land to be admeasured and laid out in lots, which 360 acres is but part of a larger tract or parcel of land containing 1500 held by patent thereof” of the proprietors. Forty of the 360 acres were added by Roger Moore “to make the said town more regular” (N. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>, 239). The terms of settlement were that a house, 16 by 20, should be built on each lot sold or “in such size as shall seem habitable” within eight months (Register’s Office, Conveyances, A, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 71⁠–⁠72). The lots contained half an acre each and were numbered, the numbers running to 350. In 1731 it was said that the town was “like to be a flourishing place by reason of its excellent situation for the trade of those parts” (N. C. R. Ill, 261), but Hugh Meredith, writing in the same year, reported that it was “but a poor, hungry, unprovided place, consisting of not above 10 or 12 scattering mean houses, hardly worth the name of a village,” but, he added, “the platform is good and convenient, and the ground high considering the country” (Pennsylvania Gazette, May 6⁠–⁠13, 1731)- Because of the slow growth of the place, a bill was passed in 1745 by the provincial assembly organizing a town government and settling and securing the titles to the land. Possession of the soil was vested in a board of commissioners, of which Richard Quince and William Dry, 2nd, were members. There is no certainty as to how many lots were sold or how many houses were built, though the owners of about fifty can be identified. We read of “Front Street,” the “Street on the Bay,” and the “Second Street on the Bay.” Other streets were probably laid out, but may not have been named.</p>
				<p>A little north of the centre, placed according to the true meridian and occupying one block, was <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip’s Church (76 <abbr>ft.</abbr> by 54 <abbr>ft.</abbr>), the walls of which, two feet nine inches in thickness, are still standing. Until 1762 or 1763 the only place of worship in Brunswick had been an “old chapel” with but 15 actual communicants (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 730); but in that year the church, which had been begun in the early fifties, was finally and after long delay roofed in (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 158, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 235, 237), and must have been used for services soon after. There was no parsonage. On the north of Brunswick was the plantation Russellboro, named for its first owner, Captain Russell of H. M. S. Scorpion, an estate of about fifty acres, which afterwards became the home, first of Governor Dobbs and then of Governor Tryon. The site of the Tryon house has recently been located and suitably marked (Sprunt, Chronicles of the Cape Fear, 2nd <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 103⁠–⁠106). On the south was York plantation, belonging to Nathaniel Moore.</p>
				<p>The town contained at least one ordinary, known as Roger’s tavern, and probably many more. Except as a port of entry and clearance, and a residence of sea-captains, merchants, and storekeepers, it was never conspicuous, though courts were held there, business was transacted, physicians practiced, missionaries labored for many years without glebe, church, or salary, and neighborly intercourse was carried on of a social and friendly character. Disorder and crime prevailed also, for as early as 1739⁠–⁠1740 we learn that both court house and jail were greatly needed (New Hanover County Records, 17371741). There lived the Drys, the Moores, the Quinces, and others of the better sort who constituted the provincial group of those who opposed many of the policies of Governor Gabriel Johnston and his friends, and who resisted with vigor the governor’s efforts to develop Wilmington at the expense of Brunswick. They had invested money in lands and buildings there and hoped that from its lucrative trade in naval stores, lumber, and rice it would in time become a great city. Burrington had said as early as 1736 that it would be a place of very great trade as soon as it became well peopled (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, 169). But all were destined to be grievously disappointed. With the rise of Wilmington, Brunswick steadily declined; and even in 1775 Miss Schaw could describe it as but a poor town “with a few scattered houses on the edge of a wood,” and her brother could call it “but a straggling village.” See also Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-5" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>. Description of North Carolina by Alexander Schaw.</h3>
				<p>In the province of North Carolina there are several rivers, which run a considerable way into the country. Upon the south is Cape Fear river, which is navigable for ships of large burden as far as a shoal which they call the Flats, about seven miles above Brunswick town, which is situated twelve miles within the bar. In consequence of this impediment, vessels which have a draught of above nine and a half feet of water cannot go up to Wilmington, which is the next port above and the most considerable town on the river, even at spring tides, till they are lightened to that draught. Above, or rather at Wilmington, the Northeast and Northwest branches of the river join. The Northwest is the least considerable, and upon the whole extent there is no town, tho’ its banks are very well settled. The first town is Cross Creek, about 10O miles above Wilmington. Here the whole trade with the back settlers is carried on for a great way round.</p>
				<p>“From Fort Johnston at the mouth of the river to Brunswick is twelve miles. From Brunswick to Wilmington there are two roads: one goes up the right side of the river upon which Brunswick stands and crosses two ferries opposite to Wilmington, occasioned by the river being there divided by a large swampy island, through which there is a very bad road of a mile and a half. The length of this road is reckoned sixteen miles. To go by the other road, one must cross a ferry at Brunswick of a mile over, from whence to Wilmington it is about ten miles. Every part of these roads is more or less sandy. Some of them for miles together is very deep, as the surface often is a pure white sand, without a particle of soil to bind it together. This is the case with almost every part of the province near the sea.</p>
				<p>“The roads on both sides of the river cross a few water runs, which in the country are called creeks; they are generally swampy along the sides, which are crowded with trees, bushes, vines, and brambles. Over all these creeks are wooden bridges. Wherever the land is dry, there is little or no brush. The woods in general are in the style of open groves in England, except in such places as have once been cleared and afterwards abandoned. These are always covered with brush. The roads upon the Northwest branch of the river grow more solid every mile above Wilmington, and long before they reach Cross Creek are very hard. The only making they bestow upon the roads in the flat part of the country is cutting out the trees to the necessary breadth, in as even a line as they can, and where the ground is wet, they make a small ditch on either side. The roads through swamp land are made by first laying logs in the direction of the road and covering them cross ways with small pine trees, layd regularly together over sod, with which the logs are previously covered.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a> The roads run constantly thro’ woods, which tho’ they are generally pretty open, yet objects at any considerable distance are intercepted from the eye, by the trees crowding into the line of direction as the distance increases.</p>
				<p>“The next navigable river to the northward is the Neuse, upon which Newbern, the Governor’s residence, is situated, about forty miles from the Sound. This river can admit only of small vessels.</p>
				<p>“Albemarle sound is the inlet to Roanoke River, upon which Edenton is situated, sixty miles within land, and about 140 miles further up the river is Halifax, which carries on considerable trade. In the neighborhood of Halifax they have a good breed of horses; to the southward the horses are smaller, but spirited and handy.</p>
				<p>“The lower parts of the province are subject to agues, pleurises and bilous complaints; the people of the back counties are not subject to these disorders.</p>
				<p>“The rivers in the lower parts of the country have no fords. Their banks are in general covered with impenetrable swamps and bottomless morasses, a very few spots excepted, upon which generally plantations are settled. But in the back country, they have good fords.</p>
				<p>“The settlements upon the lower part of Cape Fear river do not produce grain enough, particularly wheat, to answer their own demand. Large quantities are therefore sent down from Cross Creek in row boats, which in return carry up whatever goods are wanted for the use of the back settlers.</p>
				<p>“Every proprietor of ever so small a piece of land raises some Indian corn and sweet potatoes and breeds some hogs and a calf or two, and a man must be very poor who walks on foot.</p>
				<p>“Brunswick county contains fewer of the lower class of country people than any part of the whole province, particularly near the sea.</p>
				<p>“There is no specie in the province and there never was a person who could command a sum of any consequence even of their paper currency. Nothing in the stile of a banker or money merchant was ever heard of.</p>
				<p>“Governor Tryon left the province very soon after the submission of the Regulators, and when Colonel Martin succeeded to the Government, their wounds were still bleeding and they had received no protection from the oppression of the pettyfogging attorneys, whose rapacity had been the original cause of the rebellion. Governor Martin arrived in the province at this very critical time. He made a progress through his Government; and when he was in this part of the country his attention to the relief of these poor people was such as won him their highest confidence and esteem.</p>
				<p>“There is now a numerous body of the sons and grandsons of the first Scotch highland settlers, besides the later emigrants who retain that enthusiastic love for the country from which they are descended, which indeed scarce a highlander ever loses, that they will support its dignity at every risk. The Governor has attached them strongly to him, as well as the later emigrants by many services he has had opportunities of doing them. Many highland gentlemen are now in that country, several of whom have been officers, and still retain their influence among the people.</p>
				<p>“Many of the people of the largest property in the country, tho’ they now languish under the hand of oppression, will instantly join to support the Constitution, upon the first appearance of a chance of support.</p>
				<p>“The low country people in general have firearms. I never was in a house without seeing one or more muskets. Indeed the militia laws required them. The highland emigrants carried few arms with them and the Regulators delivered up the greater part of theirs to Governor Tryon.</p>
				<p>“The town of Brunswick, which is indeed but a straggling village, is twelve miles within the bar. At low water there is ten feet of water upon the bar; at spring tides there is from 19 to 20 feet, so that in fine weather ships of deeper draught can easily go in. The water, both below and above the flats is deep enough for any vessel. Vessels can run from the bar to Brunswick in three or four hours with the tide, with almost any wind.</p>
				<p>“There is good anchorage within half a musket shot of the town. The bank is pretty high for this country and the woods are cut down a good way round the town. This is the only town on the west side of the river. Brunswick county is thinly settled, consequently cattle and horses are few.” (Alexander Schaw to Lord Dartmouth, written from Orange Street, London, October 31, 1775. Dartmouth Papers.)</p>
				<p>An earlier and more particular account of the province can be found in Governor Dobbs’s “Answers to Queries” of December, 1761, N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 605⁠–⁠623; and another and contemporary account in American Husbandry (1775).</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-6" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>. Wilmington.</h3>
				<p>The beginnings of Wilmington are to be found in John Watson’s grant of 640 acres, Michael Higgins’s and Joshua Grainger’s purchase of fifty of these acres, and James Wimble’s purchase of the remainder at the forks of the Cape Fear about 1733 (Wilmington Town Records, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3⁠–⁠4). There were altogether seven grants upon which the modern Wilmington rests and at first separate names seem to have been given by the grantees to some of their particular tracts. The earliest settlement was called New Liverpool, probably because of Liverpool merchants, Dunbiben, Jenkins, Blundell, and Marsden, for example, who resided there, but in 1733 the name “New Carthage” appears, which was probably nothing more than a paper name for the James Wimble tract lying in the southern section (Register’s Office, Conveyances, AB, 6; C, 196⁠–⁠196A). Later the whole area was called New Town or Newton. This name is met with as early as March, 1735, but New Liverpool continued in occasional use until toward the end of 1736. In 1740, the name Wilmington, already in use for four years, was formally adopted out of compliment to Spencer Compton, Viscount Pevensey and Earl of Wilmington, Governor Johnston’s patron, and the village of Newton become the town of Wilmington.</p>
				<p>John Watson, Joshua Grainger, Michael Higgins (“innholder,” “victualer,” “tavern keeper,” and “merchant,” as he is variously called), and James Wimble (“mariner, late of Newton, now of Boston,” 1737<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a>) were the chief owners of the land on which Wilmington now stands, and in April, 1733, they joined in laying out the town after a plan similar to that of Brunswick. Half-acre lots were sold on condition that the purchaser build “a tenementable house,” 16 by 12, within two years after date of sale and pay a quit-rent. Before the end of 1736, Market Street, Front Street, Dock Street, Mulberry Street, Chestnut Street, Red Cross Street, King Street, Queen Street, and Nun[ns] Street were already in existence. Settlers came from England, Scotland, New England, Brunswick, the Albemarle, and the Channel Islands, and the town grew rapidly. The inhabitants were mostly mariners, artisans, merchants, innkeepers, with a physician or two and a clergyman. Unlike Brunswick it had at first few residents who combined the pleasures of town and country and who possessed, in addition to their houses in town, plantations along the banks of the Cape Fear. Though in 1765 it contained less than eight hundred people, it had been for some years dubbed “our metropolis” (South Carolina Gazette, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 23, 1748), and before Miss Schaw’s arrival had become the leading town in the province.</p>
				<p>Wilmington’s rapid advance to this position of prominence was due less to Governor Johnston’s efforts than to the natural advantages of its location. Brunswick was too near the mouth of the river and as a port was too open to the sea. The situation exposed it to storm and the attacks of pirates and rendered it dangerous as a mooring ground for rafts of lumber and lighters of naval stores which were the leading staples of that part of the province. It had no adequate back-country as an area of supply, was not readily accessible from the north, for the river at that point was too wide for easy and rapid ferriage, and in general was too remote from the other main thoroughfares of the province. Wilmington, on the other hand, had a secure and sheltered harbor, of fresh water free from the seaworms which destroyed ships lying in salt water, was readily reached from other ports of the province, and fitted in admirably with the demands of the postal system, which after 1740 was extended southward from Virginia. Peter du Bois wrote of it in 1757, “I have not yet had time to take a minute survey of this town, but from what I have yet seen it has greatly the preference in my esteem to New Bern. I confess the spot on which its built is not so level nor of so good a soil, but the regularity of the streets are [sic] equal to those of Philadelp[hi]a and the buildings in general very good. Many of brick, two and three stores high with double piazas, wch make a good appeara[nce]” (Hayes Collection).</p>
				<p>Wilmington was a town under commissioners elected by the freeholders until 1760, when by royal charter under the provincial seal, dated Brunswick, February 25, 1760, and signed Arthur Dobbs (Borough Records, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92⁠–⁠97, and at the end), it was erected into a borough. Town government and borough government continued side by side, the liberties and precincts of the latter including Eagles Island and an area stretching two and a half miles on all sides from the court house. It was given the usual powers of a borough⁠—a mayor’s court, markets, fairs, and a court of piepowder. Its government consisted of a mayor, a recorder, and eleven aldermen, and these with the freeholders constituted the Common Council, which made bylaws. The earliest mayors (each dubbed “His Worshipful”) were John Sampson, Frederick Gregg, Caleb Mason (who declined the office), and Moses John DeRosset; the earliest recorders were Marmaduke Jones and William Hooper, the latter a graduate of Harvard. In 1766 Cornelius Harnett was chosen to represent the borough in the provincial assembly (ib., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 99, 103, 107, 127, 128).</p>
				<p>The “regularity” of which Du Bois speaks was due to design. There appear to have been three consecutive plans for laying out the town: that of Higgins et al., already mentioned; that of Michael Higginbotham (“late of Newton, mariner,” 1737); and that of Jeremiah Vail, who in 1743 was employed to resurvey the town and draft a plan. This plan, mentioned in the Wilmington Act of November 30, 1745 (N. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>, 234⁠–⁠237), was accepted as official by a final Wilmington Act of 1754 (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>, 237⁠–⁠263), and, with slight changes and allowances for increase of territory, remains the official plan for the present city.</p>
				<p>The town was built on uneven ground, rising from the lowest level at the river end of Market Street, where were the wharves and the town house (under which was the town market), east and south to lands higher than they are today, constituting in the main the residence districts. The “hills,” as Miss Schaw calls them, were the elevations toward Third or Broad Street, in one direction, and the “Boundary,” now Wooster Street, in the other. There were few houses beyond these points, which lay in a sense outside the town proper. Even Third Street is represented on Sauthier’s plan of 1769 as little more than a country road, but in the five or six years before Miss Schaw’s arrival, it had become a residence street. Near the Market Street corner, on the east side, was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Heron’s house, with piazza, brick cellar, and steps on the street; across Market Street, below the jail, were the houses and lots of Duncan and Dry, and farther down, the house of George Parker. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Tucker occupied a shop on Front Street; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham’s house, with piazza and steps, was between Princess and Chestnut streets; and the house in which Rutherfurd lived until he removed to “Bowland” may have been that lying west of William Dry’s, “above the Market House,” which he transferred to Ancrum &amp; Schaw in 1768 and finally gave up to Murray of Philiphaugh in 1772 (Register’s Office, Conveyances, F, 11). The matter is, however, rendered uncertain by the fact that he and his wife sold some Wilmington property before buying “Bowland” (ib., E, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>), and this property may have included their dwelling house.</p>
				<p>Wilmington had at this time a public whipping post, a ducking stool, a burying ground which lay to the rear of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Heron’s property on Third Street, and two water engines or fire engines with hose, the first of which was bought by Captain Benjamin Heron in 1756 through his brother in England (Alexander Duncan serving as keeper in 1759, for which two of his family were exempted from working on the streets); and the second purchased in Philadelphia by Ancrum &amp; Schaw in 1772 (Wilmington Town Records, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 34, 41, 56, 64, 68, 73, 159, 163, 179).</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-7" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>. James Innes and Francis Corbin.</h3>
				<section id="appendices-7-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">James Innes.</h4>
					<p>In the year 1751 there sat at the council board of North Carolina Governor Gabriel Johnston and seven councillors, among whom were James Innes, Francis Corbin, James Murray, and John Rutherfurd, friends and associates, standing to each other on varying terms of intimacy. Though Johnston and Corbin had been political antagonists, nevertheless the five men belonged to a common group. Innes and Murray were very intimate, for, next to Thomas Clarke, Innes was Murray’s best friend in the colony; Murray and Rutherfurd, as we shall see, came to the Cape Fear together and worked together for twenty-five years. Innes and Corbin were in constant touch personally and officially, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin was the “great friend” of Rutherfurd and his wife, named one of her slaves “Rutherfurd,” and left her property to the Rutherfurd children. It is a curious fact that two of the men who sat at the council board, Corbin and Rutherfurd, should have married eventually the widows of two of the others, Innes and Johnston.</p>
					<p>Colonel James Innes, the first husband of Jean Corbin⁠—the old lady mentioned in the Journal⁠—was a Scotsman, born in Cannesby, county Caithness, a faraway region in northern Scotland, from which others also migrated to North Carolina. He probably came to the colony with Governor Johnston in September, 1734, and with his wife, whom in his will he calls “the companion of my life,” settled on the Cape Fear. He early became prominent in the province, holding many offices of trust, civil and military, and winning the esteem of his contemporaries as an honorable man and an honest and efficient public servant. He served as captain of the Wilmington company of North Carolina troops in the expedition against Cartagena in 1740 (Connor, History of North Carolina, I, 262), and was appointed after his return colonel of militia in New Hanover county. In 1754 he was spoken of as an old and experienced officer. His military service and close intimacy with Governor Dinwiddie of Virginia⁠—they called each other by their first names⁠—led to his being selected to lead the provincial troops in the Braddock expedition. His connection with that campaign is well known.</p>
					<p>Innes played a prominent part in civil life also and served his colony in many capacities, but his aptitudes were military rather than civil and he never became a political leader or a seeker for offices. Governor Johnston recommended him for the council and he sat at the board under Johnston and his successor, Dobbs, for nearly ten years. His relations with Corbin began at least as early as 1750, when the latter, as land agent for Lord Granville, associated him with himself as co-agent, and from that time to 1754, when he was dismissed by Lord Granville, Innes acted with Corbin in the Granville interest, journeying two hundred miles through the wilderness, from the Cape Fear to Edenton, to perform his duties. None of the charges brought against Corbin were ever seriously raised against Innes, and he emerges scatheless from an employment which, dependent as it was on fees and perquisites, created an irresistible itch for money. Innes died September 5, 1759» and two years afterward Corbin married his widow (shortly after October, 1761). <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jean Corbin was an “old woman” in 1775; what her age was when she married her second husband must be left to conjecture. People grew old early in colonial days; one was already “an old aged man” at sixty-one {Maryland Archives, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 78, 165). Innes was born about 1700; she may have been a few years younger.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-7-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Francis Corbin.</h4>
					<p>The Honorable Francis Corbin, as he was frequently called, was appointed land agent for Lord Granville, September, 1744, and came to North Carolina from London in November of the same year, for the purpose of “setting off to Lord Granville one-eighth part of the colony.” He was associated in succession with five co-agents, of whom Innes was one, and managed to hold on to his own position successfully till 1760. At one time or another he was a justice of the peace, an assistant judge, commissary and judge of vice-admiralty in 1754, colonel of the Chowan militia in 1757, member of the council, deputy to the assembly, and a frequent appointee on commissions and committees in the assembly and out. He was prominent in the affairs of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Church, Edenton, and it is probable that his influence there was of material assistance in his political career. He was keen, efficient, and aggressive even to turbulence, but of a personality and character that has not endeared him to posterity. He was probably honest enough in his way, for, as far as we know, no charges of a dishonorable nature were ever made except in connection with his fees as Granville’s agent, and in this particular we are not sure that he did anything strictly illegal; but at the same time it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that he was deficient in some of the qualities that make for moral uprightness and political stability. One may be prejudiced, but it seems a fitting thing that Corbin should have taken a liking for a woman whom Miss Schaw describes as not of the best character or of the most amiable manners and whose evil deeds she hopes will be forgiven. The wonder is that Jean Corbin should ever have been Innes’s “loving wife.”</p>
					<p>In the performance of their duties as agents for Lord Granville, Corbin and his first colleague, Child, were charged with acting “in concert to make the most that they could of the fees and perquisites of his Lordship’s office for their own emolument, at the expense of the people, by which means they procured great sums for themselves and little for his lordship.” When Bodley became co-agent, the complaints became so insistent and the abuses apparently so flagrant that the assembly appointed a committee to inquire into the matter. Though the committee reported that in the main the charges were true, the assembly took no further action and in consequence a number of Granville’s grantees, exasperated because of their failure to obtain legal redress, marched to Corbin’s house near Edenton, seized that gentleman, carried him off in his own chaise to Enfield, the county seat some sixty or more miles away, and there compelled him to sign a bond to disgorge. This riotous proceeding so scandalized the assembly that at its next session, in May, 1759, it sought to secure the punishment of “the authors of [the] several riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies within Lord Granville’s district.” But the effort came to nothing, and the chief interest in the incident lies in its reflection upon Corbin’s character and the attitude of the assembly, and in its place in the history of the colony as a forerunner of the Regulators’ War.</p>
					<p>Though unmolested by the assembly, Corbin did not escape so easily in his conflict with the governor. In 1748 he had joined with others in a letter to Secretary Bedford, charging Johnston with misfeasance in office, but the secretary took no action, the Privy Council dismissed the charge, and Corbin continued to sit on Johnston’s council. When, however, in 1758 he espoused the cause of the assembly against Dobbs, that excitable upholder of the prerogative suspended him from the council for prevarication and nonattendance, and removed him from his positions as assistant judge and colonel of militia. In 1760 he was dismissed by Granville from his post of agent also. Despite these humiliating experiences, perhaps because of them, Corbin was immediately elected to the assembly from Chowan county, and acting with Child, Barker, and Jones, whom Dobbs characterized as the “northern junto,” resisted the efforts which Dobbs was making, during the remaining years of his administration, to maintain in unnecessarily arbitrary fashion the legal claims of the crown. Though Tryon suggested that Corbin be restored to the council in 1766, nothing came of the nomination, probably because of his death, which took place sometime in 1766 or 1767. He left no will, and his estate, except such portions as were given his wife in the marriage settlement of 1761, was disposed of at auction, at which his wife bid in some of her husband’s personal property.</p>
					<p>Corbin spent the greater part of his life in Chowan county, on a plantation two or three miles from Edenton.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> In 1758 he began the erection in Edenton of the Cupola House, a famous old building which is still standing and which bears on its gable-post or ornament the initials “F. C.” and the date “1758,” but it is doubtful if he ever lived there.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a> When he went to the Cape Fear we do not certainly know, but it was before his marriage with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Innes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a> He could have continued to represent Chowan county, even though living at “Point Pleasant,” provided he retained in the county for which he stood real estate to the extent of at least one hundred acres. He was buried, as Miss Schaw says, at the bottom of the lawn on the “Point Pleasant” plantation, not far from the grave of James Innes, between whom and Corbin the old lady herself at last found rest “in a very decent snug quarter.”</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-8" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>. James Murray and John Rutherfurd.</h3>
				<section id="appendices-8-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">James Murray.</h4>
					<p>The career of James Murray is well told in the Letters of James Murray, Loyalist. He was connected with the Murrays of Philiphaugh, one of whom, his cousin David, the second living son of John Murray of Philiphaugh, died in Savannah, April 29, 1771. He had a brother John, who became a doctor and afterwards married Lady Anne Cromartie, widow of Edmund Atkins, superintendent of Indian Affairs in the Southern Department, who died in 1761. He was related also to the Rutherfurds, for he calls John “cousin” and had had him in charge in London before coming to America. In fact, James Murray, David Murray, and John Rutherfurd were all descended, in the third generation and in different lines, from a common great-grandfather, Sir John Murray of Philiphaugh.</p>
					<p>James Murray came to Carolina in 1735, leaving “Johnnie” in London. He arrived in Charles Town on November 27 of that year and was at Brunswick at the beginning of 1736. There he rented a house of Roger Moore and opened a store, but falling out with the Moores he went to Wilmington, bought a house and lot there, and entered into the business and social life of the town and province. Later he acquired a plantation, “Point Repose,” on the Northwest at the mouth of Hood’s Creek, and gradually drew out of trade in order to devote himself to an agricultural and farming life. During his thirty years of residence in the colony he held many important offices in town and county and under the crown. He was at one time or another commissioner for Wilmington, a justice of the peace, deputy naval officer, secretary, clerk of the council and clerk of the crown, deputy paymaster under Innes, a vestryman of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip’s, and for thirty years (except for the period of his suspension, 1757-1763) a member of the governor’s council and after 1763 its president. He was on terms of intimacy with Governor Johnston, but was unfriendly toward Governor Dobbs, who suspended him from the council, and he was always antagonistic to the Brunswick group led by Dry and the Moores.</p>
					<p>He went to England in 1738, but came back the next year, bringing with him the young John Rutherfurd. Both he and Rutherfurd were abroad from 1741 to 1743. For the third time Murray crossed the water in 1744 to marry, as his first wife, his cousin Barbara Bennet, who returned as far as Boston with him in 1749, but joined him in the colony the next year. From that time, until he withdrew permanently to Massachusetts in 1765, he continued to reside in North Carolina. As a man of strong loyalist sympathies he was out of touch with the revolutionary movement, whether in the South or in New England, and toward the end of his career found himself obliged to migrate again, and for the third time, from Massachusetts to Halifax, where he died in 1780.</p>
					<p>Murray was a man of strong will and of a masterful temperament, though not a politician and with little liking for the responsibilities of office. He preferred the quiet life of a merchant or a country gentleman, but at the express request of Governor Johnston was persuaded to accept a position under government and once in office the accumulation of posts became easier. He had energy and when in public service was inclined to want his own way. He quarrelled with Dobbs, who charged him with leading a cabal against himself, and in all his relations with Rutherfurd played the part of patron and friend somewhat more dictatorily than their relationship warranted. He suffered severely from deaths in his family, and though keeping his feelings well under control was frequently desolate and troubled in spirit. He was given to pessimistic views of life and the circumstances of the time weighed heavily upon him. He was law-abiding, conservative, and cautious, without enthusiasm or strong emotions, and he was as blind as was Miss Schaw herself to the significance of the events taking place about him. He possessed none of the qualities of a revolutionist.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-8-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">John Rutherfurd.</h4>
					<p>John Rutherfurd, his protégé and the father of the children who accompanied Miss Schaw to America, was probably less than twenty years old when he came to the colony, and for a while he lived with Murray at his house in Wilmington and served as clerk in his store. In 1750, through the influence of Dinwiddie, at that time surveyorgeneral of customs, he was appointed receiver-general of quit-rents, the duties of which and of the deputies thereto appointed in every county outside the Granville area, were to “collect from the tenants of the king’s lands the fee-farms or quit-rents reserved to the crown and to account for and disburse the same according to the instruction from the Sovereign.” His profits arose from the commissions allowed upon his receipt of these rents (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, 484). For reasons that need not be discussed here, he was removed from this position by Dobbs, at the same time that he and Murray were suspended from the council, and he was not restored until 1761, after he had made a trip to England and Scotland and had presented his case to the Treasury and the Board of Trade. After reinstatement he continued to hold the position until 1775.</p>
					<p>Rutherfurd by all accounts was not well suited to the post, a difficult one at best and made doubly so by the unwillingness of the colonists to meet their obligations. Murray said that Rutherfurd was too good-natured and of too easy a temper to be efficient. Dobbs charged him with indolence and neglect of duty, but threw some of the blame for his earlier conduct upon Murray himself, who (he said) wrote Rutherfurd’s letters and had him “entirely under his influence.” It is always wise, however, to take Dobbs’s charges with caution. Rutherfurd made a satisfactory defence before the Treasury and the Board of Trade and was able to impress upon them the injustice of his dismissal.</p>
					<p>Yet when all allowances are made, the conclusion must be reached that Rutherfurd was not a satisfactory receiver of quit-rents. It is quite likely that his failure may have been due in part to the intricacies of the system and that Dobbs’s action may have been prompted by a desire to break up the junto or cabal which he thought was working against him. But these reasons will hardly serve to explain Governor Martin’s strictures upon Rutherfurd’s conduct. Martin charged Rutherfurd with a want of “proper diligence and exertion” and recommended his dismissal a second time as one who was “in every respect utterly disqualified for the position.” “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rutherfurd⁠ ⁠… is unhappily the receiver-general of His Majesty’s revenues,” he wrote Lord Dartmouth in 1774, “of excellent temper but strangely confused understanding, and actually disqualified by invincible deafness for public business” (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 973). Of Rutherfurd’s deafness we have other evidence. In 1758, when in London, he wrote Lord Granville that he wished to resign his seat in the council, “because my hearing is so bad that I can’t discharge my duty as I could wish and desire” (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 959). It may be that his deafness had something to do with his failure as receiver. Yet he continued to sit on the governor’s council to the end, served as a member of a court of claims in 1773, was frequently on committees, and seems to have had no trouble in carrying on ordinary conversation and doing his private business.</p>
					<p>There are ample manifestations that Rutherfurd was energetic and efficient in many directions. In 1751⁠–⁠1752 he obtained a number of judgments against the estate of Colonel Robert Halton for nonpayment of quit-rents, seized several parcels of Halton’s lands, put them up at public vendue, and had them sold to the highest bidder (Register’s Office, Conveyances, <abbr class="initialism">B.C.</abbr>, 24; Brunswick County Records, A, 12). He went to England and Scotland in 1758 and was gone three years obtaining a reversal of his suspension. He defended himself with adroitness and vigor in the letters that he sent to the Treasury and the Board of Trade. When in London in 1761 he wrote a pamphlet, The Importance of the Colonies to Great Britain, which was considered good enough to be printed. He and his brother Thomas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-263" id="noteref-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a> who died in 1781, were both colonels of militia, one in New Hanover and the other in Cumberland county. Of his frequent journeyings we have ample testimony. He visited Charles Town a number of times and in 1768⁠–⁠1769 went as far as Georgia (South Carolina Gazette, March 30, 1769). He served the colony well on two important commissions, involving tedious travel and hard labor⁠—one in 1767 to settle the boundary line with the Cherokees, and the other in 1772, an undertaking of seventy-six days, for which he was never paid, to determine the line between North and South Carolina. Henry Laurens of Charles Town, whom he visited and with whom he had business dealings, thought well of him. “A worthy man,” he calls him, “a sensible worthy man, of a good fortune, and an exceedingly good planter and farmer,” and again, “an agreeable worthy man, a good planter, farmer and mechanick.” With him, Laurens says, he had many talks “of new methods of planting and new articles to plant” (Laurens Letter Books). Of Rutherfurd’s interest in agriculture, Miss Schaw gives an interesting account, while what she says of his plantation does not suggest either indolence or inefficiency.</p>
					<p>In 1754, sometime after May 6, Rutherfurd married Frances, the widow, first, of one Button (of whom we know nothing more), and second of Governor Johnston. She was Johnston’s second wife and possibly his third, for such accounts as we have of Johnston’s life before he married Penelope Galland, Governor Eden’s stepdaughter, sometime between 1737 and 1741, would indicate that he had been married before.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-264" id="noteref-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a> However that may be, he married <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Button in 1751 and died himself at his seat, “Eden House,” in Bertie county, in 1752. Frances was still a “young widow” when she married Rutherfurd, and in appearance small, as we learn from Samuel Johnston’s letter to his son, 1754, in which he says, “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rutherfurd has a brother come in, one about seventeen years old, very small and like his sister; talks and behaves like a man, makes me believe him older, but is probably designed for Miss” (Hayes Collection).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-265" id="noteref-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a> She became the mother of the three children of Miss Schaw’s narrative and herself died early in the year 1768. Who she was or where she came from originally we have not been able to discover.</p>
					<p>In the settlement of Governor Johnston’s will there was considerable controversy and even litigation, and Rutherfurd was engaged for many years in closing up the estate. That he did not perform this task to the satisfaction of the Johnston family is well known. Samuel wrote to his son in 1757: “I don’t know what to think of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rutherfurd, he has never any money. He offered me one order on you and when it came it was after this manner, pay such and such people and the remaining part send to your father, which I returned him” (Hayes Collection).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-266" id="noteref-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a> The most troublesome questions were the amount due Penelope under Henry Johnston’s will and the distribution of the arrears of Governor Johnston’s salary. The latter was not effected for nearly fifty years, as will be noted elsewhere (Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>). In 1752 the British government owed Johnston’s estate more than £12,000, arrears of salary. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rutherfurd put in a claim for this amount and after considerable difficulty and expense Rutherfurd when in England obtained a royal warrant, dated February 5, 1761 (Treasury 52:51, <abbr>p.</abbr> 437), authorizing the payment. As the North Carolina quit-rents were not sufficient for the purpose, the warrant was addressed to George Saxby, receiver-general for South Carolina, instructing him to pay over to the Johnston heirs the entire amount from the quit-rents of that province. As late as 1767 we find Rutherfurd endeavoring to obtain from Saxby, through Henry Laurens, attorney to the estate, payment of the sum authorized by the Treasury.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-267" id="noteref-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a> Before his death he had secured all but £2,018 of the whole, but as we shall see in discussing the later history of the claim (Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>) he appropriated to his own use a larger share of what he obtained than he was entitled to receive as administrator of his wife’s estate.</p>
					<p>Rutherfurd began to accumulate property early in the fifties. In 1755, the year after his marriage, he was assessed in the Wilmington valuation of that year at £225 and his taxables were rated at ten. He had a house in Wilmington and was living there as freeholder as early as 1747. In 1749 he was elected a town commissioner, but leaving the province at the time, he was reflected in 1751 and continued to serve for a number of years. In common with many others, among whom were his fellow Scots, Duncan, Schaw, Ancrum, Robert Hogg, and George Parker, he was frequently cited for neglecting to work on the streets, bridges, and wharves of the town⁠—the duty of every taxable⁠—and at one time was subject to fines running as high as £9 (Wilmington Town Records, passim]. He was of the firm of Rutherfurd &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, dealers in lumber and merchandise, in 1751, and from 1762 to 1766 was in partnership with Alexander Duncan. He continued to reside in Wilmington until 1758, when he went to England and Scotland, where he obtained his restoration to the council, wrote his pamphlet, secured from the Treasury the warrant authorizing the payment of Governor Johnston’s salary, and in Scotland negotiated a loan of £7,440 with the aid of John Murray of Philiphaugh and another Scottish friend, who guaranteed the loan with the royal warrant as security. Returning in 1761, he and his wife, with the money thus borrowed and other funds obtained from the sale of some of their Wilmington property, purchased of Maurice Moore, on December <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, a plantation of 1920 acres at Rocky Point on the north side of the Northeast beyond the bend, and removed from Wilmington to reside in the country. He named the plantation “Bowland,” and with this and other landed property, some of which he acquired in 1766 (the Rockfish lands) and in 1768 (the Western Prong lands), he became, as Henry Laurens called him in 1767, a man “of a good fortune.” He retained lands in Wilmington, had a tar house on Eagles Island before 1769, and in 1768 petitioned for permission to erect a public grist mill on an acre adjoining Rockfish Creek opposite the Holly Shelter “pocosin.”</p>
					<p>He was living at “Rowland” in September, 1768, but in that year his financial troubles began. His wife, the executrix under Governor Johnston’s will, having died some months before, John Murray of Philiphaugh became alarmed for his security. Rutherfurd had paid £4,000 of the £7,440 due, but seemingly was unable to pay the remainder. Willing and desirous of giving further indemnification, for Murray was meeting the interest on the bonds, he handed over to Robert Schaw as trustee his entire property, including his £1,000 legacy from Duncan and a proportion of the debts due the firm of Duncan &amp; Rutherfurd, for the purpose of discharging the debt and avoiding a suit in chancery. But this arrangement failed to satisfy Murray, who in January, 1771, brought suit before the North Carolina court of chancery, sitting at New Bern. The matter was referred to Governor Tryon for arbitration who decided in Murray’s favor and the court confirmed his decision. Rutherfurd handed over to Murray in fee simple ownership his Western Prong lands in Bladen county (4320 acres), “Bowland” (1920 acres), his Sound lands (320 acres), and his Wilmington real estate (168 acres), valued altogether at £4,300 proclamation money (Register’s Office, Conveyances, F. 95102, 327⁠–⁠329). Of this transaction his son John said, in 1788: “Our father had nothing. John Murray of Philiphaugh stript him of everything when he went out to Carolina, except the property which my mother brought him, which was secured to her by her marriage settlement<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-268" id="noteref-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a> and again secured to us by decree in chancery, when John Murray wanted to seize upon it as our father’s property.” In 1774 Governor Martin spoke of Rutherfurd as “bankrupt in point of fortune,” and we know that the year before Rutherfurd had written to William Adair in London expressing his desire to leave the colony and asking that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Abercrombie, the former agent, be requested to inform him “if he hears of any good office at the Boards of Treasury, Trade or Auditor’s office.” “At present,” he adds, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> McCulloh is agent, but as he probably is to be dropped soon I have no objection to being agent but do not wish to be obliged to him for any good office” (Letter to William Adair, Pall Mall, dated Newbern, March 26, 1773, Phillips Manuscripts).</p>
					<p>But Rutherfurd did not leave the province. If Martin, writing on April 6, less than a year before Miss Schaw’s arrival, is correct in his statements, then Rutherfurd must have recovered very rapidly from his financial troubles, for in the spring of 1775, when Miss Schaw visited his plantation, he was controlling “Hunthill,” an estate of more than 4000 acres, lying between the Bald Sand Hills, adjoining New Exeter, on Holly Shelter Creek, ten miles from Rocky Point and thirty miles from Wilmington. “I have been at a fine plantation,” she writes, “called Hunthill, belonging to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rutherfurd, [on which] he has a vast number of negroes employed in various works. He makes a great deal of tar and turpentine, but his grand work is a sawmill, the finest I ever met with.” Miss Schaw’s description is not exaggerated. The property had been bought for £2,000 of Sampson Moseley in 1772, through D’Arcy Fowler, attorney at law of Wilmington and later a loyalist, and plats of it may be found today in the Wilmington records and among the manuscripts at Raleigh. It was a fine estate, though only in part cleared and developed. According to the testimony of John, Jr., and Samuel Graham, in charge of the forge, there were 150 slaves, many of whom were valuable tradesmen, more than 300 acres of land cleared and planted with corn and other grains, a valuable sawmill and smith’s forge for the iron work, and room, timber, and water enough for two more sawmills, cutting 20,000 feet of lumber a week. There were also teams of twenty oxen, one hundred and fifty head of cattle, horses, hogs, and sheep, and a great deal of valuable furniture and many plantation implements. The whole estate furnished in 1781 enough to make several thousand barrels of pitch, tar, and turpentine for British markets and a great quantity of shingles for the West Indies. If Rutherfurd was bankrupt in April, 1774, and in possession of this property at least as early as September, 1774, when Graham says that he was first employed there, it is evident that he must have bought it with his children’s money⁠—probably the £1,780 obtained from the sale of Conahoe and Possum Quarter (plantations in Tyrrell and Granville counties which had been left to his wife by Governor Johnston), and have held it in trust for them. He may have used also some of the arrears of Johnston’s salary, which belonged to them as their mother’s heirs; he may have been aided by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin, for in her will she speaks of debts incurred and negroes loaned, of which Rutherfurd was to make no accounting; and he may have used the money left by Duncan and the debts due him as a member of the firm, for these do not appear to have been handed over to Murray in the final settlement. From a later indenture we learn that the property was bought in trust for the two boys until they should attain the age of twenty-one years (Register’s Office, Conveyances, F, 1415;H, 197⁠–⁠199;?, 152⁠–⁠155).</p>
					<p>Rutherfurd, according to his son’s statement, “having done everything in his power to suppress the distractions in North Carolina, before the arrival of his Majesty’s troops, took the first opportunity of joining Lord Cornwallis. When the troops were withdrawn [from North Carolina, after the battle of Yorktown], he was under the necessity of embarking with them for Charles Town for the protection of his person from the resentment which his loyalty had stirred up against him, augmented by the discovery of his having placed both his sons in his Majesty’s service. Of the negroes [150] belonging to him and his sons in their own right he could only carry off 6 for want of room in the transport.” All the negroes which remained behind, the lands, mills, horses, cattle, utensils, and furniture fell into the hands of the Americans, and Rutherfurd’s waiting man, Sandy, was murdered for having served as a guide in Lord Cornwallis’s army. Rutherfurd remained at Charles Town until what little property he had remaining was nearly spent and his health and spirits were so much impaired that sometime after March, 1782, he had to leave America. He set forth on a vessel bound for England, but died at Cork, at the age of sixty, sometime in the same year (Son’s statement, Audit Office Papers). He left no will.</p>
					<p>The estimate of losses, as given in the son’s memorial of March 23, 1784 (Audit Office, Loyalists Claims, 36, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 339⁠–⁠354), is as follows:</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>To attendance, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, for running the boundary line between Sth Carolina and Nth Carolina, as mentioned in the memorial of John Rutherfurd [<abbr>Sr.</abbr> to the Treasury]</td>
								<td>£ 562. 2</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To balance due on the royal warrant</td>
								<td>2018.19</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Lands, slaves, plantation utensils and cattle valued by order of the prevailing persons in Nth Carolina in 1779 at £36,842.18 that currency, which reduced to sterling makes £21,052.14, and which in the year 1777 £979.5 taxes were paid. [This item probably covers both the Corbin lands and “Hunthill”]</td>
								<td>21,052.14</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>23,633.14</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>The effort of the children to obtain in part a restitution of this property is dealt with in Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-9" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>. The Rutherfurd Children.</h3>
				<p>Accompanying Miss Schaw to America were the three children of John Rutherfurd⁠—Frances or Fanny, John, Jr., and William Gordon. Their father, as we know, was of the Scottish family of Rutherfurd of “Bowland,” and their mother, Frances (see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>), was the widow of Governor Gabriel Johnston of North Carolina, whom Rutherfurd had married in 1754. They were all born in North Carolina and lived there, probably at Rutherfurd’s plantation, “Bowland,” at Rocky Point on the Northeast branch, until after the death of their mother in 1768, when their father sent them back to Scotland to be educated.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-269" id="noteref-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a> As Rutherfurd was unable to leave the colony on account of his official duties (since except for one visit in the years from 1758 to 1761 he never saw Scotland after he left it sometime before 1735), he was obliged to entrust the children to the care of friends, and apparently placed them in charge of Alexander Duncan, a partner of his in business at Wilmington, who crossed the ocean at this time. Duncan was an intimate friend of both the Rutherfurds and the Schaws, was a Scotsman from Edinburgh, and in his will, made just before he sailed, left money to both Rutherfurd and his daughter, to the latter “in case she returns to this province and marries here.” Duncan probably took the children, at that time aged ten, five, and two, respectively, with him to Edinburgh and placed them in the hands either of Rutherfurd’s relatives or of Miss Schaw, wherever she may have been living. The Rutherfurds and Schaws were closely connected by marriage, for Janet’s father had married Rutherfurd’s aunt, and her brother, Robert, had married his eldest sister, Anne, so that it would have been natural enough for Duncan to have done either, though the probabilities are in favor of Miss Schaw. Rutherfurd’s father had died in 1747, and his family was scattered: Thomas and James, his brothers, and Anne and Barbara, his sisters, were in North Carolina, and “Rowland,” the Rutherfurd estate in Scotland, had passed out of the hands of the family. The children of John Rutherfurd remained in Scotland until the voyage of 1774⁠—Fanny at boarding school, probably in Edinburgh⁠—when Rutherfurd, having decided to stay in North Carolina, and with the aid of his children’s money having acquired a new plantation, “Hunthill,” some thirty miles from Wilmington, wished them to return to the province.</p>
				<p>Owing to unexpected circumstances connected with the outbreak of the Revolution in North Carolina, the children, instead of remaining with their father, returned to Scotland with Miss Schaw. Soon after, the boys, at this time thirteen and ten years old, were placed in a free school in England under the protection of Lord Townshend, an arrangement having been entered into in 1768, according to which the profits from the negroes left by the father and mother were to be used during the father’s lifetime to provide for their education. But in the sequel this arrangement was found to be inoperative, and the money actually used for the boys’ education was £700 from the Corbin estate (originally from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin’s first husband, Colonel James Innes), which had been for many years in the hands of Governor Dinwiddie, an intimate friend of Innes’s and lieutenant governor of Virginia from 1751 to 1758.</p>
				<p>When the war of the Revolution came on, Rutherfurd incurred considerable ill-will in North Carolina by entering both boys in the British service, one in the army and the other in the navy. John joined the corps of engineers, became a practitioner engineer and second lieutenant in 1781, a first lieutenant in 1790, a captain in 1795, an assistant quartermaster general at Plymouth Dock in 1799, a major commandant of a corps attached to the quartermaster general’s department in 1800, and in 1805 a lieutenant colonel. For a time he was stationed at Gibraltar, later at New Brunswick and Jamaica, and in 1805 was surveyor-general of the island of Trinidad. Soon after that date he was placed on the half pay list as of the Royal Staff Corps, was secretary at Gibraltar in 1810, and died sometime between February, 1816, and March, 1817. After the close of the Revolutionary War, he several times obtained leave of absence from the army, and crossed the Atlantic in an effort to obtain a restitution of the family property in North Carolina. He visited Charleston, made three trips to Wilmington, and lived for a while in New York, where he may have been entertained by his relative, Walter Rutherfurd, with whom he had financial dealings,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a> either at his New York house, next <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Church, or at his estate at Boiling Springs, now Rutherford, New Jersey, which he had called “Edgerston” after his old home in Scotland.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a> For more than twenty-five years John labored to secure, for himself and his brother and sister, the value of the land and the negroes. He was probably never married.</p>
				<p>“Little Billie” had a more distinguished career. In 1778 he became a “Boy A B” and midshipman on H. M. S. Suffolk, stationed in the Channel, and there served until the end of the war. According to his brother’s account, he was turned adrift in 1783, entered the merchant marine, and served as fourth mate of an Indiaman from 1783 to 1789. In 1787 he was in the East in Indian waters, but in 1789 was back in London, living at Cornhill. Soon after, he entered the royal navy again, finished his time as midshipman on various guardships, and in 1794 became acting lieutenant on the Boyne, in the West Indies with Sir John Jervis, afterwards Admiral Earl <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-272" id="noteref-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a> He rose rapidly in rank. In July of the same year he was commissioned commander, first of the Nautilus, and then of the Adventure, and in November was appointed post captain of the Dictator. In 1799 he was transferred to the Brunswick, then to the Decade, remaining with the latter in the West Indies, the Channel, and the Mediterranean as senior frigate captain under Admiral Lord Nelson, until May, 1805.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-273" id="noteref-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a> At that time he became acting captain of the Swiftsure, a new thirdrate seventy-four, and at Nelson’s express wish was given permanent command in July. In charge of this vessel he took part in Nelson’s famous pursuit of Villeneuve’s fleet⁠—the Toulon fleet⁠—which had sailed for the West Indies in the summer of 1805, in order to draw the British admiral from the neighborhood of the Channel, to cross which for the invasion of England Napoleon was waiting at Boulogne. While on his return from the West Indies, Captain Rutherfurd wrote the following letter.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Swiftsure at Sea, August 4th, 1805 My dear John:</p>
					<p>I write this at sea to go to you when an opportunity offers. When we go into harbour we are so much hurried that I have no time to write to anybody except Lilly [his wife]. Young Millikin came to me at Gibraltar last month. The boy has had a long hunt after me, as he left Dublin in December last. Fifty pounds a year will be too much for him for some time to come: he says he is to draw for money upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Batchelor, 27 William’s Street, Dublin, when he wants small sums. I will approve his drafts upon that gentleman, of which I will thank you to apprise him. I am sorry that I could do but little with Allan [not the young Millikin mentioned above]. I therefore thought it best for him to leave him in the frigate [the Decade] with <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Stewart. A stranger to him and his connections may perhaps make him do better than I could. I believe the frigate is left in the Mediterranean. We are now at sea with Lord Nelson, and from the course he steers I think we are going to England, at least I hope so; but he had not given us a hint of where we are going; all we can judge is by the course. Perhaps you and your friends may think it strange my leaving the frigate for a seventy-four, but circumstances and times must be taken into account. When the ship became vacant, I was senior frigate captain with Lord Nelson. He offered me this ship when he was in hot pursuit of the Toulon fleet [January-August, 1805]. It was impossible to refuse a fine new seventy-four when we expected to be in action with the French fleet every day. If the admiralty will allow me to keep this ship⁠—and I see no reason why they should not⁠—the post is certainly a more honourable one than a frigate; and I think prize-money times are almost passed, £500 a year in this ship is better than £200 in the frigate. What a chase we have had after those Toulon fellows. We have been in the West Indies; had troops embarked at Barbadoes, making certain the French were attacking Tobago or Trinidad. We went there, but no French were there. We anchored at 6 <abbr>in.</abbr> the evening at Trinidad, and sailed at 7 next morning. I saw nothing of my brother John. We made sure they were attacking Grenada, but when we got there no French fleet was there. We then went to Antigua, where we heard the French fleet had passed that island steering to the northward five days before. We landed the troops immediately, and steered back for the Mediterranean. When we arrived at Gibraltar we heard no account of the French fleet, but we knew they had not passed that way. We got stores and water as fast as possible and the fifth day we were out of the Straits again, and I now hope steering for England. Lord Nelson, I believe, is generally thought to be merely a fighting man; but he is a man of amazing resource and abilities, more so, I think, than even Lord Vincent. I am afraid the constant anxiety he has undergone has much hurt his health. The privations this little fleet of eleven sail has gone through has been great; but it has been with cheerfulness, because Lord Nelson commanded them. All our ships have now a great many men down with the scurvy, which makes me think we must go to England. If you do not know Lord Nelson, he is the most gentlemanlike, mild, pleasant creature that was ever seen. Coming from the West Indies, I was upon salt beef and three quarts of water for a month. We had no communication from the islands to get anything either to eat or drink. Lord James is my messmate, and well and strong and good; his time as mid[shipman] will be out in October. Tell my sister [Fanny] George Burt [sic] is a good boy. I thought you would like to hear the history of this fleet; therefore I must put you to the expense of postage. Love to all at home.</p>
					<p>Yours very truly,</p>
					<p>Wm. G. Rutherfurd.</p>
					<p>J. C. Beresford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr> Beresford Place, Dublin.</p>
					<p>[Has been posted at] Brixham 208, August 30, 1805.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-274" id="noteref-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a></p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>From this interesting letter⁠—interesting not only for the light it throws on “little Billie’s” career but also as a commentary on Nelson and the West Indian expedition of 1805⁠—we learn several important facts that open up a new phase of our story. John was stationed at Trinidad, Billie was married and his wife was living in Dublin, and Fanny and her husband had removed from Plymouth and had taken up their residence in the same city. We are introduced to a number of new characters⁠—J. C. Beresford, young Millikin (William Frederick), and Lord James, of whom Beresford is the only one that calls for further mention and something will be said of him later on. The preservation of this letter, amongst the flotsam and jetsam of a genealogist’s notes⁠—a letter the author of which was entirely unknown to the writer of the volume in which it is printed⁠—is a curious documentary accident.</p>
				<p>From the letter we learn that Captain Rutherfurd was married. This event took place, August 27, 1795, at <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s, Westminster, and the bride was Lilias or Lillias Richardson, eldest daughter of the late Sir George Richardson, Bart., of Queen Street (Gentlemans Magazine, 1795, <abbr>p.</abbr> 789). The marriage settlement is dated August 27th of that year. Lilias died sometime before 1833 without issue, but there appears to have been an adopted son, John Henry Defou, of whom Rutherfurd speaks in his will, “commonly called Henry Rutherfurd, of the age of 12 years, usually residing with me except when at school” (P. C. C. 431 Creswell). Of this child we know nothing more.</p>
				<p>Captain Rutherfurd’s later career is a noteworthy one. As captain of the Swiftsure he took part in the battle of Trafalgar, October 21, 1805, contributing his share to the winning of the great victory and escaping with but little loss⁠—nine men killed and eight wounded. In the official list of the battle his name is given as “William George Rutherford” and identification would have been difficult had it not been for the discovery of his letter, his will, and the notice of his death. He remained in command of the Swiftsure until his discharge in November, 1807, when he was placed on half pay; but for some reason, ten days after his discharge, he was appointed captain of the Sea Fencibles, a position that he retained until February, 1810, when he was again placed on half pay. In 1815 he was made a Companion of the Bath (on the enlargement of that order) and the next year was appointed one of the four captains of Greenwich Hospital, a position that made him an officer of the house in residence, at a salary of £200 a year with table money. Evidently the hardships which he had undergone told upon his health,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-275" id="noteref-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a> for he died at the hospital in 1817 at the age of fifty-two. Thus “little Billie,” born in North Carolina, stands in history as one of the “heroes of Trafalgar.” In his will he leaves his Trafalgar sword and medal to his nephew, his sister’s son, and these interesting relics, the outward marks of a notable career, may still be somewhere in existence. That Captain Rutherfurd should have been promoted by Nelson himself to be a captain of a ship of the line was a rare distinction. Such an advancement must have come as a reward for services rendered, probably for good seamanship and personal bravery. North Carolina should take pride in being the birthplace of so noteworthy a man.</p>
				<p>Fanny, who in some ways is the heroine of Miss Schaw’s narrative, seems to have been an attractive girl and the frequent references to her arouse our interest and curiosity. She evidently made a strong appeal to those with whom she came into contact and at least one love affair arose during her residence on the Cape Fear (above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 183). But she returned to Edinburgh in February, 1776, heart free, only to find a husband within five months after her arrival. In September, 1776, she was married at Edinburgh to Archibald Menzies of Culdairs, one of the commissioners of the customs of Scotland. What romance or tragedy lies behind the bare announcement of this marriage, we do not know. Whether it was a love match or a mariage de convenance is equally concealed. Menzies held an important official post to which he had been appointed in 1774, and his salary of £600 a year may have been an attraction to the family. Fanny was certainly “well married,” as a contemporary correspondent wrote. Whether Menzies was an elderly man or an invalid or both, we cannot say, but the fact remains that Fanny’s happiness was short-lived, for her husband died at Inveresk in October, 1777, after a married life of but little more than a year. A daughter was born of this marriage, Elizabeth McKenzie Menzies, who afterwards became the wife of the John Claudius Beresford,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-276" id="noteref-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a> to whom Captain Rutherfurd wrote the letter cited above. Where Fanny, with her daughter, spent the days of her young widowhood we do not know, but she eventually found solace, for sometime in 1787⁠—the marriage settlement is dated April 28th of that year⁠—she was married again, and this time to her companion on the voyage to America, Janet’s brother, Alexander Schaw, storekeeper of ordnance on the gun wharf at Plymouth, serving under the War Office at £140 a year.</p>
				<p>Alexander Schaw was a younger brother of Janet’s and at the time of the journal may have been thirty years old. We are told that he had been a writer in Edinburgh, who, having got into difficulties, the nature of which we do not know, decided to go to America and applied for a post in the customs service. By commission of March 31, 1774, he received the office of searcher of customs at <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher. After leaving Antigua in January, 1775, he went to <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts with his sister and the children, but did not remain, having obtained permission to go with the party to North Carolina, on the understanding that he would return as soon as possible. That he intended to do this is clear, and at one time in the summer of 1775 it looked as if he would take his sister and the children back from North Carolina to <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts; but events over which he had no control brought about a complete change of plan, and in the summer of 1775 he was entrusted by Governor Martin, at that time on board the Cruizer in the Cape Fear River, with despatches for Lord Dartmouth. He consequently returned to England by way of Boston, and remained there during the winter, living in London. On March 6, 1776, he obtained formal leave of absence from his post in <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, and there is reason to believe that he never saw the West Indies again. As an Alexander Schaw was in Canada from 1778 to 1781, employed in surveying stores and paying corvees, it is likely that he went to Canada, remaining there until his return to England to fill the more important position of storekeeper at Plymouth.</p>
				<p>At Plymouth Alexander married Fanny, his erstwhile companion, who had called him “uncle” on the voyage, and there they lived until in May or June, 1801, they removed to Dublin, where Alexander had secured, by appointment of the Board of Ordnance (April 28, 1801), the post of storekeeper, an office which with the additional duties of paymaster of salaries and allowances brought him in more than £500 a year with house rent and candles. From the Ordnance records we learn that in preparing for removal Alexander objected to the sloop at first provided, on the ground that it was too small, and asked for a brig, which was granted. After his arrival in Dublin (June 30), he wrote the board that his furniture and packages had amounted to sixteen tons, and as they entirely filled the vessel, he and his wife were obliged to obtain accommodation from one Canforth of the Britannia yacht tender, at a fee of ten guineas (War Office, Ordnance Book, 45: 56 and following volumes). By the middle of the summer of 1801 he and his wife, servants, and furniture were satisfactorily established in a house in Dublin, and there they remained until sometime after 1805. On August 5, 1803, Alexander was pensioned as “superannuated” by the board, and retired on an allowance of £677 a year (Irish money), but continued to live in Dublin, until sometime before 1810, when he removed to Inveresk, Scotland. In Ireland he was one of the members of the Dublin Society, but his name does not appear in the list for 1810, and his will, which was made at Inveresk, November 22, 1810, shows that he was residing there at that time. When or where Fanny died we do not certainly know but it was probably in Scotland. From her brother’s letter we learn that she was alive and living in Dublin in 1805, but in 1810, in Alexander’s will, she is referred to as “my late wife.” She probably died at Inveresk shortly before, aged about fifty-two or fifty-three. Alexander died in 1818.</p>
				<p>By her marriage with Alexander Schaw, Fanny had at least one child and probably more. Alexander in his will speaks of this child, John Sauchie Schaw, as “my son and only surviving child of the said marriage.” When this son was born is not quite certain, but it must have been some years after the marriage in 1787, as he was not of age in 1810 and was not married until 1828. In 1819 he was a lieutenant of artillery in Dublin, and on March 14, 1828, entered into a marriage license bond of £1,000 on the occasion of his marriage with Catherine Louisa Sirr, of Dublin Castle, daughter of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Joseph Darcy Sirr. He was living at the time at Cullenswood, Dublin county. With his later career we are not concerned.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-10" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>. The Children’s Inheritance.</h3>
				<p>In the ordinary course of events, the Rutherfurd children, at their coming of age, would have fallen heirs to a very considerable property from their father and mother and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jean Corbin, large enough to have made them in a measure financially independent. This inheritance would have been derived from three sources.</p>
				<p>First, from their mother, who received from the estate of Governor Johnston, her second husband, (a) two plantations, Possum Quarter in Granville county and Conahoe in Tyrrell county, which with certain other lands constituted her share of the Johnston real estate; (b) a considerable number of negroes; and (c) a fifth share in the residuary estate.</p>
				<p>Secondly, from their father, who at one time possessed (a) the extensive lands which were later seized by John Murray of Philiphaugh, (b) the legacy of Alexander Duncan of £1,000, (c) his share of the debts due the firm of Duncan &amp; Rutherfurd, and (d) the debt due him from the province for running the boundary line with South Carolina. This property had probably all been lost before 1782, for we know that Rutherfurd died insolvent.</p>
				<p>Thirdly, from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin, who at her death left the children (a) certain plantations secured to her under the terms of her marriage settlement with Francis Corbin, (b) a considerable number of negroes, and (c) a certain amount of personal property, stock, utensils, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in part from the “Point Pleasant” plantation. “Point Pleasant” itself was not included, as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin had only a life interest in that estate and could not dispose of it by will.</p>
				<p>Owing to various circumstances, most important of which were Rutherfurd’s bankruptcy and the confiscation of Loyalists’ estates during the Revolution, this inheritance had dwindled by the year 1783 to relatively slender proportions, and at that time the recovery of even a small part seemed very uncertain. The children soon found that they could count on success in three particulars only: (a) the negroes, originally numbering from 150 to 175 <abbr>in.</abbr> all, (b) the arrears of salary, of which, in 1783, £2,018 remained unpaid, and (c) the plantation “Hunthill,” which had been acquired for them in trust by their father in 1772, probably from money obtained in part from the sale of Possum Quarter and Conahoe in 1768 (£1,780) and in part from other sources.</p>
				<p>It is not necessary or possible to follow in all details the early stages in the history of the recovery of these properties.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-277" id="noteref-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a> In 1784, John Rutherfurd, Jr., obtaining leave of absence from his duties at Gibraltar, went to North Carolina, “to endeavor (so his memorial states) to obtain a repeal of the sanguinary laws and resolves against himself and his family and in hopes of recovering some part of the property they have thereby lost” (Audit Office Papers, American Loyalist Claims, 36, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 339⁠–⁠354). At first the children employed as their attorneys Alexander Schaw, Fanny’s husband, and Alexander Anderson, a lawyer of Princess Street, Lothbury, London, but when John, Jr., arrived in Wilmington in 1784, he put the business into the hands of Archibald Maclaine and George Mackenzie, and at a later visit, in 1786⁠–⁠1787, into those of John London, formerly town clerk of Wilmington and an influential merchant there. London remained the children’s attorney in North Carolina for a quarter of a century. In his diary, written in 1800, he says under date June 20, “Wrote packet to <abbr>Capt.</abbr> John Rutherfurd and enclosed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashe’s letters and accounts to him and <abbr>Capt.</abbr> W. G. Rutherfurd” (North Carolina Historical Commission <abbr>MSS.</abbr>), and we know that he and his son, John R. London, were still acting for them in 1814.</p>
				<p>The first attempt made was to recover the negroes. In 1786, John, Jr., given power of attorney by his sister and brother, presented a memorial to the assembly of North Carolina, asking for the restoration of the negroes bequeathed them by their mother and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin (N. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>, 178), which had been hired out by the sheriff of New Hanover county at a money wage. The committee to which this memorial was referred recommended that the rights of the petitioners be recognized and that the negroes be returned. The Senate and House of Commons concurred in this recommendation (ib., 186⁠–⁠187, 189, 417) and resolved, December 31, 1787, that the sheriff be required and directed “to restore to John Rutherfurd the negro slaves, the property of the said John Rutherfurd, William Gordon Rutherfurd, and Frances Menzies, widow, hired out by order of the court of said county, together with such monies and securities as he may have received for the said hire” (ib., 418). As the result of this resolution, the children were enabled to sell the negroes and did so at the first opportunity. George Mackenzie acted as agent, agreeing to find purchasers for them at £40 apiece before January, 1791- On March 12, 1788, John received £960 for his share and signed a release (Register’s Office, Conveyances, I, old book, 8⁠–⁠9) and the next year, through John London as attorney, Fanny and William Gordon received £890 (ib., L, Pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 243). The number of negroes thus disposed of was fifty-seven. Though all the details of these transactions are not available, it is evident that the fifty-seven were only a part of those eventually recovered. In 1812 John London sold for John and William Gordon (Fanny being dead) a third lot (seven) for $1,480 and a fourth lot (twenty-three) for $4,812 (ib., O, 368; P, 152). Thus as far as our record shows eighty-seven negroes were sold at an approximate return to the children of $15,500, without reckoning in anything that might have been received for negro hire.</p>
				<p>The recovery of the arrears of Governor Johnston’s salary, the most important part of his residuary estate, proved a much more difficult and litigious matter, and ended somewhat unexpectedly for the children. There were originally four beneficiaries under the residuary clause of Johnston’s will: the wife, Frances, the children’s mother, one-fifth; Samuel, the brother, two-fifths, for the education of his family; a sister, Elizabeth, and her heirs in Scotland, one-fifth; and a natural son, Henry, one-fifth. In the years since 1752 many changes had taken place. Frances, the wife, had married John Rutherfurd and died in 1768; the sister Elizabeth had married Robert Ferrier in Scotland, but, she dying, he became attorney for their daughters until he too died and the daughters acted for themselves; and Henry Johnston died in 1772 and left his share to Penelope, his half-sister, who later married John Dawson. More than £10,000 had already been paid under the Treasury warrant of 1761, but of its distribution we know very little. We do know that Rutherfurd, acting in his wife’s name (she was sole executrix of the will), received before her death a larger portion than she was entitled to, and that consequently soon after her death in 1768, Samuel Johnston, not liking Rutherfurd’s management, obtained letters of administration, and not only secured for himself some part of the arrears, but was able also to remit to others a portion of that to which they were entitled. At the close of the Revolution the amount remaining to be paid was £2,018.</p>
				<p>Soon after 1783 application was made to the Treasury by the heirs in England for the payment of this remainder, but the Treasury officials refused to comply until the heirs could agree on a plan of distribution. To meet this requirement, in March, 1791, the Rutherfurd children and the Ferriers, father and daughters, through Alexander Anderson as attorney, entered into an agreement, according to which each was to follow up the matter, bearing individually his or her part of the expense and furnishing a statement of what each had already received. Anderson procured letters of administration (P. C. C, August 31, 1791) and with these documents in hand obtained from the Treasury the desired warrant, September 5, 1791. Having received the money, he carried out the terms of the agreement, investing £1,850 of the £2,018 in three percent consolidated bank annuities and stock and turning over the remainder to Robert Ferrier and W. G. Rutherfurd, representing their respective heirs. Ferrier died at this juncture, and his daughters, dissatisfied with Anderson’s conduct in the case, employed another lawyer, secured new letters of administration, and in 1795, sued Anderson in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, Easter Term. Anderson in reply charged them with breaking the agreement and filed a bill in the Court of Exchequer. The object of these suits was to obtain control of the money invested in consols with the accruing dividends.</p>
				<p>The situation now became so involved and threatened to be so expensive that the contestants agreed to submit the dispute to arbitration and selected two London merchants, Robert Barnewell and Henry Smith as arbitrators. Under the terms of the new agreement, each party was to pay all legal expenses hitherto incurred and to submit without demur to the decision of the board. All living within twenty miles of London were to be examined personally under oath and all living farther away were to make depositions on oath before a local justice of the peace. The examinations occupied two years. The arbitrators questioned the parties, investigated books, papers, vouchers, and other documents, scrutinized the accounts presented by the different persons, and endeavored to ascertain what each heir had already received. Captain William Gordon Rutherfurd seems to have conducted the business for his brother and sister, as between April, 1797, and February, 1799, he was absent from his ship on leave, a fact demonstrated by a complete lacuna in his correspondence with the Admiralty during that period. It was not until the latter date that with “his private affairs settled” he announced himself ready to join the Brunswick at Jamaica or to continue hi any other way his naval service (Adm. 1: 2400⁠–⁠2402. There is not a single letter from him in volume 2401).</p>
				<p>The arbitrators finally rendered their award, July 10, 1798. All lawsuits were to be stayed; the Anderson estate (Anderson himself having died in the meantime) was to return to the heirs £57; and the amount in dispute, £1,850 in three percent consols with £627 in dividends, was to be distributed to the heirs. But in this distribution the Rutherfurds were to have no share, for the arbitrators decided that Frances Rutherfurd, as executrix (through John Rutherfurd acting in her name), had already received £654 more than was her due and that the Rutherfurd heirs owed the Johnston estate that amount (less one-fifth on account of Henry Johnston). Consequently they were to receive nothing until the other heirs had been paid their shares in full. As four shares of £524 each would not exhaust the principal sum, it is possible, though very unlikely, that the children eventually received some small amount from this source.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-278" id="noteref-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a></p>
				<p>There still remained to be recovered the real estate in North Carolina, consisting chiefly, if not entirely, of the “Hunthill” lands. These lands had been confiscated during the Revolution and a part had been regranted by patent from the state. We have not been able to discover any formal act or resolution restoring these lands to the children, as was the case with the negroes, or any court decision under the act of 1786 (N. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>, 795), but it is clear that in the case of the “Hunthill” property the decree of confiscation was in some way reversed. In 1811 one Israel Judge restored to John London, acting in the boys’ behalf (Fanny being dead), a portion of “Hunthill,” which he had obtained under a state title, for the nominal consideration of £5 (Register’s Office, Conveyances, P, 154) and in 1814 London sold to one Ezekiel Lane, for the sum of $2,700, which he transmitted to the boys, this tract and other tracts making up the “Hunthill” property of 4084 acres, which had been bought by John Rutherfurd of Sampson Moseley in 1772, in trust for the children (ib., P, 155⁠–⁠156). In so doing London brought to an end a long period of service in the interest of the Rutherfurd family, during which he had been largely instrumental in recovering for the surviving members property that they were able to sell for nearly $20,000. The children’s fight for their inheritance was long and costly and the persistence with which they pursued the struggle to the end deserves our admiration. Fanny did not live to see the final success, and the others, including Alexander Schaw, who had some share in the business, lived but a short time after the last transaction was completed. The shadow of this great expectation, long deferred and never more than in part fulfilled, hung over them for the greater part of their lives.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-11" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span> A Group of Provincial Leaders.</h3>
				<p>In studying the social and political history of North Carolina one is constantly impressed with the close connection that existed between South Carolina and the Cape Fear section of North Carolina, and with the frequent intermarriages that took place among the members of a large group of intimately associated families. The widely spreading branches of one genealogical tree include names from the families of Wright, Rhett, Trott, Izard, Hasell, Smith, Moore, Quince, Dry, Eagles, Allen, Grainger, Howe, and others, many of whom came originally from the southern colony. Representative men from these families formed a strongly united provincial group, that stood at times in outspoken opposition to those in the colony who were of English or Scottish birth⁠—Johnston, Murray, Corbin, Innes, Rutherfurd, and Schaw, newcomers and “foreigners.” Though no fixed lines of cleavage can be drawn, and though the antagonisms were manifest only at certain times and in connection with certain troublesome provincial problems, nevertheless the feeling was always latent, notably between the Brunswick group led by Moore and Dry and those who were the friends and followers of Governor Johnston. The quarrels over the blank patents and the town of Wilmington are well known (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>-<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>) and Murray facetiously referred to the situation when he spoke of “a Dryness” subsisting “between some certain gentlemen and me until the unhappy differences of the province are reconciled” (Letters of James Murray, Loyalist, <abbr>p.</abbr> 42).</p>
				<p>Miss Schaw mentions only a few of the leaders of the provincial party, but they play a sufficiently important part in the narrative to call for brief mention here.</p>
				<section id="appendices-11-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Richard Quince.</h4>
					<p>Richard Quince, the elder, the father of Parker and Richard, Jr., was one of the leading merchants and traders of the colony, doing business at Brunswick under the firm name of Richard Quince &amp; Sons; which later became Parker Quince &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, doing a considerable upriver business. He was at one time or another a commissioner of the town of Brunswick, chairman of the inferior court of pleas and quarter sessions of Brunswick county, a church warden of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip’s, a judge of vice-admiralty, a justice of the peace, a member of the Wilmington Committee of Public Safety, and, with his son Richard, a member of the general committee of the Sons of Liberty. He was an active participant in the Revolution, died in 1778, and was buried in the churchyard of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip’s, Brunswick. He was originally from Ramsgate, England, where he had a brother John (who apparently before 1768 came to Wilmington and set up as a merchant there), and where he owned a house, which he retained during his lifetime. He was also a freeman of the Cinque Ports, of which in 1741 “he produced a sufficient testimony” and was therefore excused from jury duty (Brunswick County Court Records, 1737⁠–⁠1741, <abbr>p.</abbr> 133). He lived first at “Orton” plantation and later at “Rose Hill” on the Northeast, a plantation that he left to his son Parker. The latter and his brother Richard are said to have been “gentlemen of great respectability and devoted Whigs, but quiet and unobtrusive in their characters and never mingled in public life.”</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-11-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">William Dry.</h4>
					<p>William Dry, the collector, was fourth in descent from Robert Dry, or Drye, who settled in South Carolina about 1680, and his grandfather, father, and himself all bore the same name. William Dry, 1st, married Elizabeth, daughter of Benjamin Blake, brother of the famous English admiral, Robert Blake (South Carolina Historical and Genealogical Magazine, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 109, note 6), and died about the year 1700. He was a planter of influence and property and owned a plantation, “Oak Grove,” next north of the present site of the navy yard, Charleston, which he inherited from his father and which he left to his son (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>, 60⁠–⁠61). The latter, William Dry, 2nd, was one of the original grantees of lots in Beaufort Town and acquired a second plantation, two miles above Goose Creek bridge, fronting the highroad, whereon he lived and where his son William Dry, 3rd, the collector, was born in 1720. This property he advertised for sale or rent in 1733 and both plantations for sale in 1734 (South Carolina Gazette, July 28, 1733, February 2, 1734, May 18, 1735), in anticipation of his departure for North Carolina; and he finally left the colony with his family soon after August, 1735. He had married Rebecca, sister of Roger, Maurice, and Nathaniel Moore, and it was undoubtedly through his interest in their Cape Fear project that he joined them in the enterprise. Either before his arrival or immediately after, he bought lots in Brunswick and lived there as a merchant, justice of the peace, and captain of militia until his death, which occurred in 1746 or 1747. His wife survived him about ten years.</p>
					<p>The son, William Dry, 3rd, was fifteen years old when he went with his father to the Cape Fear. He first became prominent in September, 1748, when, at the age of twenty-eight, as captain of the militia, he led the attack (aided by men from Wilmington) on an invading force from two Spanish privateers, which had landed and obtained possession of Brunswick. He became a colonel in 1754, was appointed collector in 1761, was named one of the charter aldermen of Wilmington in 1760, served in the assembly from 1760 to 1762, became a member of the council in 1764 and continued in the latter capacity under Dobbs, Tryon, and Martin, until in July, 1775, he was suspended by Governor Martin on the ground of being disloyal to the crown. He took the side of the Revolution, though he was never particularly active in its behalf; and when the new constitution was adopted, accepted a seat on the revolutionary council.</p>
					<p>In February, 1746, Dry married Mary Jane Rhett, granddaughter, through her father, of William Rhett and, through her mother, of Nicholas Trott of South Carolina, and (as the marriage notice states) “a lady of great fortune and merit” (South Carolina Gazette, February 24, 1746). He had a large plantation, “Belleville,” on the north side of the road leading from Wilmington across Eagles Island southward, and at his death left this plantation to his daughter, Sarah, “one of the finest characters in the country,” who married Benjamin Smith, later governor of the state and the founder of Smithville (now Southport), who was of the Landgrave Thomas Smith family of South Carolina. He died in 1781, aged sixty-one, and was buried in <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip’s churchyard. His wife survived him until 1795, when she died at the age of sixty-six. She must have been married at seventeen.</p>
					<p>It was at Dry’s residence in Brunswick that Josiah Quincy dined in 1773, and so well that he called it “the house of universal hospitality” (Journal, <abbr>p.</abbr> 459).</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-11-3" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Joseph Eagles.</h4>
					<p>Richard Eagles, the elder, of a Bristol (England) family, lived in South Carolina until 1735, when he too joined the Cape Fear colony. In South Carolina he owned a house and store in Charles Town, which he offered for rent in 1733 (South Carolina Gazette, January 13, 1733), a lot in the town of Dorchester, and a plantation, “Eagles” (on Eagles Creek near Dorchester, South Carolina Historical and Genealogical Magazine, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>, 47⁠–⁠48), which he advertised for sale in 1734, with dwelling house, large store, stable, and chaise house (South Carolina Gazette, August 3, 10, 1734). He must have left the colony before August 30, 1735, as at that time he is spoken of as “late of Charles Town, merchant” (ib., August 30, 1735). He married Elizabeth Crichton, a granddaughter of the first William Dry, and so was a cousin by marriage of William Dry, the collector. His son, Richard Eagles, 2nd, married Margaret Bugnion, and was the father of Joseph Eagles, mentioned in Miss Schaw’s narrative.</p>
					<p>Joseph Eagles, who had not “come to the years of eighteen” in 1769, when his father’s will was made, cannot have been much more than nineteen or twenty at the time of Miss Schaw’s visit. He was “not yet major,” as Miss Schaw says, and was under the guardianship of her brother Robert, who had been appointed one of the executors of Richard Eagles’s estate. He had been sent to England when but a child, living probably with his father’s relatives in Bristol, and had but just returned, thoroughly Anglicized. He did not go back, however, as Miss Schaw thought might be the case, but remained in the colony and married there. His wife was Sarah, surname unknown. He died in 1791, leaving two children, Richard, 3rd, and Joseph, 2nd, the first of whom died before 1811, and the second in 1827, each without heirs. As only an aunt remained, the wife of Alfred Moore, the disappearance of the family name from the annals of North Carolina is readily accounted for (Brunswick County Records, Conveyances, B, 84, 189, 327, 341, 368; North Carolina Reports, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 267, 269).</p>
					<p>Eagles’s plantation, which Miss Schaw visited in so unexpected a way, was called “The Forks” and was inherited from his father, who was living upon it at the time of his death. It was situated a short distance above Old Town Creek, on the road from Brunswick to Schawfield, was bounded on the south by Eagles Creek, and lay a little way below Eagles Island opposite Wilmington⁠—an island that received its name from Joseph’s grandfather, who owned land there. The plantation was of considerable size, containing a house, a sawmill, and a gristmill.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-11-4" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Robert Howe.</h4>
					<p>Robert Howe was born in North Carolina in 1730, the third son of Job Howe, or Hows, as the name appears to have been spelt originally. His grandfather (also a Job⁠—there were three of the name) came with the Moores from South Carolina, and Robert, through his grandmother, Mary Moore, sister of Roger, Maurice, and Nathaniel, was related to the Moores, Drys, and others among the first settlers. He was sent to England early, returning in 1748, and soon began to play his part in the history of the colony. He became a justice of the peace in 1756, was appointed captain at Fort Johnston in 1765, succeeding Dalrymple, was superseded by Collet in 1767, but resumed the post on Collet’s return to England in 1769, and was finally supplanted on Collet’s return in 1773. He was for a time a baron of the court of exchequer and became a member of the assembly as early as 1760. He married Sarah Grange, daughter of Thomas Grange, “a respectable planter on the Upper Cape Fear River” (North Carolina Booklet, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, 169), but was separated from her in 1772 and never remarried. His political and military career after 1772 is too well known to need rehearsal here.</p>
					<p>Howe’s personality and character have been variously interpreted according to the point of view. Miss Schaw expressed the opinion common in loyalist circles. Governor Martin, while acknowledging that Howe was a “man of lively parts and good understanding,” charged him with “misapplication of the public money” and with endeavoring “to establish a new reputation by patriotism.” Quincy, a northerner, thought better of him, as “a most happy compound of the man of sense, the sword, the senate, and the buck. A truly surprising character.” No one has ever questioned his ability, energy, or devotion to the revolutionary cause, but it may be that the “relation of his past life and adventures” (did we but have it) would be to us, as it was to Quincy, “moving and ravishing.” “He was,” adds the latter, “formed by nature and his education to shine in the senate and the field⁠—in the company of the philosopher and the libertine⁠—a favorite of the man of sense and the female world. He has faults and vices⁠—but alas who is without them.” This duality of character may explain the unpleasant impression of Howe which Miss Schaw received. Howe’s opposition to Martin and his later military activity and influence stamp him as a leader of men and a determined, obstinate fighter, but certain incidents of his life and his later court-martial⁠—though he was unanimously acquitted⁠—seem to point to flaws in his character that have never been fully explained.</p>
					<p>Howe’s father had estates on the Sound and a plantation at Howe’s Point below Brunswick. The latter, containing a large three-story frame building on a stone or brick foundation, became Robert’s residence and was largely destroyed by the British on May 12, 1776. Howe died in 1786, at the age of fifty-six.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-11-5" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">James Moore.</h4>
					<p>James Moore, colonel and major general, was grandson of James Moore, who emigrated from Ireland to Charles Town, was governor there under the proprietors, and died in 1706. His father was Maurice Moore, the pioneer and the third husband of the widow Swann, who was his mother. He was born in New Hanover precinct in 1737 and spent his early years inconspicuously, probably on his father’s plantation at Rocky Point⁠—at least until 1761 when the property was sold to John Rutherfurd. He was appointed a justice of the peace in 1759 and a colonel of militia before 1765. He took part in Tryon’s campaign against the Regulators, as colonel of “all the artillery and artillery company of volunteers,” with Robert Schaw as lieutenant colonel, and was present at the battle of Alamance, which ended in the defeat of the Regulators in 1771.</p>
					<p>James Moore was one of the best types of those who conscientiously opposed the royal government in America, and from the time of the Stamp Act until his early death he was generous and high-minded in his efforts to promote the cause of the Revolution. He was appointed, September 1, 1775, colonel of the first regiment of Continental troops raised by authority of the Convention, and in February, 1776, was already in the field, prepared to oppose Brigadier General Macdonald, who, at the head of the Highlanders, serving under the royal standard, was marching on Wilmington. He was in command of the campaign which culminated in the battle of Moore’s Creek bridge, and took part in the manoeuvres preliminary to the battle, but through no fault of his own had no actual part in the fighting that followed. As soon as the battle was over, he directed the movement of the troops and vigorously pressed on the pursuit (Connor, History of North Carolina, I, 373, 385⁠–⁠387). As Noble says, “Moore planned the whole campaign, provided for every contingency, and drove the enemy into the hands of two brave colonels [Caswell and Lillington, each at the head of a provincial regiment] who had taken their stand at Moore’s Creek. The success of the American arms is entirely due to his foresight, energy, and skill” (North Carolina Booklet, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>).</p>
					<p>Moore served in the American army less than a year, dying of fever at Wilmington, January 15, 1777. His loss was deeply felt, for friends and foes alike spoke well of James Moore. Miss Schaw’s comments on both Robert Howe and James Moore show the shrewdness of her judgment.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-12" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>. A Few North Carolina Loyalists.</h3>
				<section id="appendices-12-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Robert Schaw.</h4>
					<p>Of Miss Schaw’s elder brother, Robert, or “Bob” as he was known to all his friends, something has already been said. The first mention of him that we can discover in North Carolina records is as a witness to an indenture of John Rutherfurd’s in 1751 (Register’s Office, Conveyances, <abbr class="initialism">B.C.</abbr>, 24) and the second is of date 1759, when he was cited for failure to work on the streets and wharves of Wilmington and the road from Point Peter to <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Misery on the east side of the Northwest (Wilmington Town Records, <abbr>p.</abbr> 76). He had probably begun as an apprentice in a merchant’s office, for, as his sister said, he had been in trade before turning planter. Such apprenticeship might easily have been entered on at ten years of age. It would look as if he had been employed in the store of some Scotsman⁠—probably Alexander Duncan, who was closely connected with the Rutherfurds and Schaws and with whom he was afterwards in partnership. As his name does not appear among the Wilmington taxables in 1755 or among those with houses in Wilmington in 1756, it is likely that he did not marry much before 1760, which would put his birth date at least as far back as 1740. He may have been and probably was much older. Legally to witness an indenture one would have to be twenty-one years old. That would put his birth before 1730.</p>
					<p>He prospered in business, and sometime after 1760 became a partner, first, in the firm of Duncan, Ancrum, &amp; Schaw, and later, after the departure of the senior member for England in 1767, in the firm of Ancrum &amp; Schaw, doing a general merchandising business. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Burgwin once wrote, “Hoggs tea is all gone and all his handkerchiefs but one; the tea I got at Ancrums.” Robert Schaw served in many important capacities, being frequently called upon to act as trustee, guardian, executor of estates, and witness of wills, and seems to have been held in high esteem as a prudent and reliable person. He became a justice of the county court in 1768, a commissioner of Wilmington in 1769, was appointed a colonel of artillery under General Waddell in Tryon’s expedition against the Regulators in 1771, and on September 1, 1775, was commissioned a colonel in the revolutionary army. He was, however, always lukewarm in support of the American cause and refused to follow the lead of the radical party. In June, 1777, James Murray wrote, “Bob Schaw will be obliged to leave Carolina for not taking the oath to the states.” There is reason to believe that his property was sequestrated, for in 1786, the administrators of his estate were authorized to sell lands in Bladen county, known as the Western Prong lands, and to save the personal estate for the widow and son (N. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>, 177, 391). As by indentures between John Rutherfurd and Robert Schaw, September 7 and 8, 1768, the latter was made a receiver of the former’s property (Register’s Office, Conveyances, F, 92⁠–⁠102), it may be that these are the lands that Rutherfurd formerly owned and that Schaw bought of Murray of Philiphaugh.</p>
					<p>Schaw married as his first wife, Anne, the sister of John Rutherfurd, who died without issue, January 11, 1767 (Scots Magazine, 1767, <abbr>p.</abbr> 167), and as his second, Anne Vail, who is the “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Schaw” of the journal. She was the widow of Job Howe, the brother of Robert, and had one child, William Tryon Howe, by her first husband, and two children, Alexander<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> and Robert Schaw, by her second. Alexander was born before 1775 and died in 1802; Robert, Jr., was born before 1778 and died probably before 1788, as he is not mentioned in his mother’s will. Robert, Sr., died in 1786 and his wife two years later in 1788. In the Wilmington Centinal and General Advertiser for June 18, 1788, is inserted a “Request” that all persons indebted to Robert Schaw, Alexander Duncan, deceased, Duncan, Ancrum, &amp; Schaw, and Ancrum &amp; Schaw settle and make payment or renew their obligations.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-12-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Thomas Cobham.</h4>
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Thomas Cobham, who occupies a conspicuous place in Miss Schaw’s story, was a prominent “practitioner in physics” in Wilmington, the first mention of whom in contemporary records is of date March 22, 1765, when he witnessed the will of Lieutenant Whitehurst of H. M. S. Viper, who, in the duel with Alexander Simpson, master of the same vessel, fought on March 18, received wounds from which he died. In his own testimony before the Loyalist Claims Commission he says that he settled on the Cape Fear in 1766 and from that time followed his profession. He had a partner, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robert Tucker, to whom he made a division of a third of the profits of his practice, but from whom he had parted before he finally left the colony. He accompanied Tryon on the campaign against the Regulators, dividing with a <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Haslin the inspection of the troops (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, 584). He was loyalist in his sympathies, and at first, on March 7, 1775, refused to subscribe to the Continental Association; but on the 13th changed his mind and in the June following sent two guineas to the Committee of Safety for the purchase of gunpowder. In August he promised, at the request of the committee, not to send medicines to Governor Martin on board the Cruizer, and after the battle of Moore’s Creek bridge attended without pay the Loyalists who were wounded in the battle. He said afterwards that he never took any oath to the Americans but obtained a certificate from a magistrate that he had taken an oath.</p>
					<p>Cobham planned to go to England on the opening of the war, but was prevailed upon to remain “by the executive officers of government,” until the occupation of Wilmington by Craig, January 28, 1781, when he joined the British troops and was appointed surgeon to <abbr>H. M.</abbr> naval hospital at Charles Town and later by Admiral Digby to the same at <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine. There he remained until Florida was given back to Spain in 1783, when he and the hospital were removed to New Providence in the Bahamas. He continued in the service of the hospital there until he was discharged, April 5&gt; 1786, when in September he returned to England. There he learned from letters received soon after that his estate in North Carolina had been confiscated and sold (Audit Office Papers).</p>
					<p>He and his wife, Catherine Mary Paine, widow of John Paine of Brunswick county, early bought land on Old Town Creek, but in 1771 they sold this property and acquired a plantation of 1300 acres, with two sawmills, in which Cobham had a half interest. In 1772 he occupied a house in Wilmington, rented of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jane Dubois, probably on Front Street (Wilmington Town Records, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154, 160), and there Josiah Quincy dined “in company with Harnett, Hooper, Burgwin, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Tucker, and others” on March 29 of that year, and there too he lodged and was treated with great politeness, though, as he wrote in his journal, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham was “an utter stranger and one to whom I had no letters” (Journal, <abbr>p.</abbr> 460). In or about March, 1775, Cobham purchased of George Moore, for £840 proclamation money,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a> another house between Princess and Chestnut streets near the river, which may have been the house called “The Lodge,” where Miss Schaw was entertained and from the balcony of which she saw the review. On December 5, 1778, Cobham exchanged this house for a plantation of 500 acres in the neighborhood of Wilmington, probably near Schawfield. This seems to be the plantation referred to in a deed of 1779, according to which John Rutherfurd sold to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham 200 acres on both sides of the main branch of Long Creek, “adjoining the mill lands of Cobham,” which (according to the deed) Rutherfurd had received by the will of Jean Corbin (Register’s Office, Conveyances, H, 10. There is no such bequest in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin’s will; the property may have been sold by Rutherfurd for his children).</p>
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cobham, mentioned by Miss Schaw, died sometime before 1777. There was a daughter also, Catherine Jane, whom Cobham left, together with his furniture, in the care of a lady in Wilmington when he went to Charles Town, and for whom he made provision, leaving for her, in trust, 400 acres on the west side of the Northwest, next Schawfield on Indian Creek (Register’s Office, Conveyances, L, Ft. 2, 567⁠–⁠568).</p>
					<p>That <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham was highly respected in Wilmington is plainly evident. Thomas McGuire, one of the witnesses before the Loyalist Claims Commission, said that he was a man not only of probity but of distinguished eminence in his profession. He was still living in 1797.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-12-3" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Robert Hogg.</h4>
					<p>Robert Hogg came to North Carolina from northern Scotland about 1756 and became a successful and prosperous merchant, living “in affluence,” as the record says. He was a native of East Lothian and had two brothers, James and John, the former of whom in 1774, at the age of forty-six, came to the colony from Caithness with his wife and five children, all of the latter under eight years of age. Robert Hogg had visited Caithness in 1772, and finding his brother James tormented by local thievery and disorder, persuaded him to go to America, which he did, bringing with him a shipload of 280 persons, including his own family of sixteen, with servants, 174 passengers above the age of eight, 60 children under eight, and 30 infants. James settled first at Cross Creek, where he ran a store in close conjunction with Robert’s store in Wilmington.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-281" id="noteref-281" epub:type="noteref">281</a></p>
					<p>We meet with traces of Robert’s life in Wilmington from the Wilmington town records. In common with many other estimable citizens who preferred to pay a fine rather than work on the roads, he was occasionally cited as a defaulter. In 1769 he and John Ancrum were elected commissioners of the town, but as he wished to leave the province to go to Scotland in 1772, his place was taken by his partner, Samuel Campbell. On his return he found the revolutionary movement under way and at first cooperated with the Wilmington Committee of Safety. But in July, 1775, when the members began to advocate extreme measures, he withdrew, and in September sailed for England, with a letter of recommendation from Governor Martin to Lord Dartmouth, written on board the Cruizer, August 31, as follows: “A merchant of first consideration in the colony, where he has resided many years, and who is compelled by popular clamour and resentment to abandon his important concerns here, because he will not renounce his principles, which he has maintained with a manly firmness and steadiness, which do equal honour to his heart and understanding. As I know no gentleman better qualified than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hogg, both by his intelligence and candour, to represent the state of this colony, I think it a point of duty to introduce him to your Lordship, and to give you opportunity of communication with him” (Dartmouth Papers). <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> DeRosset wrote soon after, “Perhaps you will be surprised to hear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hogg is in England. He was one of your non-conformed to the times, and so made off!” Two years later James Clarke wrote to James Hogg, at that time in Hillsboro, “I have always had a great friendship for your brother and never considered him an enemy to this country” (N. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, 478). Robert Hogg was one of that large class of intelligent moderates in the colonies who were unable to see the necessity of extreme measures and were literally forced into opposition against their wills. In the growth of the revolutionary movement the time had unfortunately passed when moderation was longer possible.</p>
					<p>Robert Hogg remained in England, living in Threadneedle Street, very frugally, with an aged father to support, until the summer of 1778, when hearing of the North Carolina law, passed December 28, 1777, declaring forfeit the property of all who did not return by October of that year, he determined to sail for New York, to await the issue of the efforts of the second peace commission. He arrived before September, 1778, but died in New York the following year, leaving his brother his heir. James remained in North Carolina and endeavored to recover some of the debts due the firm of Hogg &amp; Campbell. The debts of the firm amounted to £18,669, currency (apparently including such also as were owed to merchants in England, which they paid); the debts due them in the colony came to £34,999, currency, and among those owing the firm money may be found the names of Robert Schaw and Archibald Neilson (Audit Office Papers).</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-12-4" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Samuel Campbell.</h4>
					<p>Samuel Campbell was a native of North Carolina and a merchant of Wilmington in partnership with Robert Hogg and for a time with Frederick Gregg. He became a captain of militia, and was compelled to take the oath of allegiance to the United States. He became captain of a company in Wilmington, which exercised privately before the battle of Moore’s Creek bridge, apparently with the intention of cooperating with the Highlanders; but later was ordered by the Committee of Safety to march to Fort Johnston and dismantle it (see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 205). This he refused to do and was threatened with court-martial, but in the end was neither imprisoned nor tried. He then retired into the country and paid a sum of money for a substitute. He openly joined Craig in 1781 and was appointed a captain of militia, and when Craig marched into the country was placed in charge of the town. On the evacuation of Wilmington he went to Charles Town and was appointed by Colonel Leslie a colonel of militia, but on the failure of the southern campaign he left the city and went to Nova Scotia (Second Report, Ontario Bureau of Archives, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 54⁠–⁠55). There he purchased an improved farm in the neighborhood of Shelburne, settled upon it with his family, and expended upon it what property he had left. In 1786 he reported that he had not enough to live on, but in 1800 he was still there (Register’s Office Conveyances, L, Pt. 2, 726). His wife, Alice, was a niece of Samuel Cornell, a man of some prominence in the political affairs of North Carolina, who became himself a Loyalist, lost his property, and otherwise suffered at the hands of the revolutionary party.</p>
					<p>Campbell in withdrawing his allegiance to the state transferred to James Hogg all claims to the property of Hogg &amp; Campbell, and because debarred from bringing suits in his own name, was protected by an act passed in 1787, authorizing James Hogg and two others to maintain suits in their own name as executors (<abbr class="initialism">TV</abbr>. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>, 187, 417; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>, 858⁠–⁠859). He said that his former income (“gains in trade”) was £600 a year and that his own personal loss was £2,000 sterling.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="appendices-12-5" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Thomas Macknight.</h4>
					<p>The case of Thomas Macknight illustrates admirably how unfortunate often was the policy of the radical revolutionaries in driving out many men in sympathy with the cause of America, but who for one reason or another were unable to adapt themselves at once to a program of revolt. Our revolution was true to type, and in the year 1775 there was no place in the revolutionary party for men who qualified in any important particular their entire submission to the will of those in control. A radical minority dominated the movement and played the autocrat without mercy, pursuing with intolerant resentment anyone who failed to see the situation eye to eye with themselves. It could not have been otherwise, for a revolution to be a revolution means the uncontrolled rule of a relatively small body of men. The hardships which the moderates suffered in the years from 1774 to 1780 are comparable, mutatis mutandis, with the hardships suffered by men of moderate minds and restrained opinions in the revolutions of England and France.</p>
					<p>The documents in the Macknight case are many and voluminous, but only a few facts need to be stated here.</p>
					<p>Thomas Macknight was a Scotsman, who came to North Carolina in 1757 and during the eighteen years that followed rapidly advanced to a position of influence and large wealth. He owned landed property in five counties in the colony, chiefly in the Albemarle region, though some of his land lay in the south near the upper Cape Fear, and he was deeply interested in shipbuilding and the export trade in conjunction with certain merchants of Norfolk, Virginia, with whom he was joined in a business partnership. His energies for many years were expended in the effort to build up the industry and trade of the northern part of the province, which in the period after the removal of the capital to New Bern and the growth of the Cape Fear section had tended to decline. When the revolutionary troubles came on, he exerted his influence to hold the Albemarle counties (notably Currituck and Pasquotank) to their allegiance, and succeeded in doing so until October, 1775. In the convention of April 4, 1775, he was present as a representative from Currituck, and when at the session of Thursday, April 6, the members were called upon to subscribe to the Continental Association, he was the only one who refused, on the ground that the doing so would involve a repudiation of a debt owed to a certain merchant in Great Britain, an act so dishonorable that he was unwilling to consider it. He asked for time in which to settle his obligations and his request was upheld by a majority of the members present, who refused at first to vote a sentence of excommunication. But the radical minority, threatening to leave if the sentence was not voted, forced the majority to pass the vote and to declare Macknight “inimical in his intentions to the liberties of America.”</p>
					<p>Macknight had already withdrawn from the convention, and, after the vote was declared, the other representative from Currituck and the two representatives from Pasquotank also withdrew. Before they did so, however, they drafted a statement of reasons and requested that it be entered in the journal of proceedings, but the convention refused their request and they were obliged to vindicate in the newspapers their attempt to rescue “the character of a gentleman we greatly esteem from undeserved obloquy and reproach.” Through that medium both they and Macknight stated the facts in the case, the latter declaring “that he was greatly concerned he could not heartily concur in the vote proposed to be passed, on account of particular circumstances in his situation which obliged him to dislike some part of the Association; that he owed a debt in Britain which the operation of the non-exportation agreement would disable him to pay; and that he could not approve of a conduct in a collective capacity, which as an individual he should blush to acknowledge.” He added further, “that he thought it a duty he owed to his own sincerity to mention this sentiment, but did not mean to obstruct the good purposes proposed by an union of measures; that he would cheerfully comply with the non-consumption and non-importation agreement, and should give a passive agreement to the non-exportation article; that an individual, as a member of society, ought to conform his action to the general will of it, but that opinions could not be altered without conviction or insincerely expressed without dishonesty.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-282" id="noteref-282" epub:type="noteref">282</a></p>
					<p>In a similar public announcement, issued by the other deputies from Currituck and Pasquotank, the latter expressed their faith in Macknight’s intentions as having been “always friendly to the cause of American liberty, his actions evidently showing to us, who are his neighbors, the uprightness of his intentions; nor did we observe any disingenuous or equivocal behaviour in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macknight to warrant the censure of the convention in the smallest degree, but some of those who were with him before, being now offended by his withdrawing from amongst them, joined the other party.” Macknight in his turn publicly expressed his obligations “to the inhabitants of Newbern in general and more particularly to his friends, who by continuing their wonted civilities have discovered to the world their opinion of the proceedings of the convention relative to himself” (North Carolina Gazette, April 14, 1775).</p>
					<p>From this time forward, Macknight became a marked man, “inimical” whether he wanted to be or not. He was cajoled, bribed, and threatened; finally an attempt was made to assassinate him in his own house, and his dwelling, his merchandise, his crops, and his negroes were plundered. Then he fled, first at the end of 1775 to Lord Dunmore in Virginia, and after that in February, 1776, to Governor Martin. He returned once to the Cape Fear in July or August, 1776 (Second Report, Ontario Bureau of Archives, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1231), but finally toward the end of 1776 he left permanently for England. We meet with him once or twice appearing before the Loyalist Claims Commission, in behalf of Carolina friends.</p>
					<p>During the years that followed he made long and persistent efforts to obtain compensation for his losses, in part for property confiscated in North Carolina, and in part for two vessels, one of which was commandeered by the British authorities in North Carolina, the other, cleared in September, 1775, with a valuable cargo for Lisbon, was seized by the Americans in December, and, when released, taken off Cape <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent by a British man-of-war, in May, 1776, and condemned as lawful prize under the Prohibitory Act. For ten years he labored in desperation, appealing to the Treasury, Lord North, Lord George Germain, Lord Dartmouth, and the Loyalist Claims Commission, but never succeeded in securing anything that he considered an adequate compensation. Of his later career we know nothing. With the failure of his efforts he completely disappears from view. As we read through the long series of letters, petitions, and memorials to be found among the papers of Lord Dartmouth and the Loyalist Claims Commission, we are puzzled to understand the causes of his failure. Even with full allowance for the fact that the evidence is ex parte, Macknight’s case seems a peculiarly pathetic one. (A convenient printed statement may be found in The Royal Commission on Loyalist Claims, Roxburghe Club, for which see the index; later letters and petitions, with one exception, are in manuscript, copies of some of which may be found at Raleigh.)</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-13" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>. Archibald Neilson.</h3>
				<p>The “stranger gentleman,” to whom Miss Schaw refers, and with whom she was destined to become exceedingly intimate during the last few months of her travels, was Archibald Neilson. He was born in Dundee, Scotland, the home of Governor Gabriel Johnston and his brother Samuel, about the year 1745. One who, as Miss Schaw says, had seen a great deal of the world, was highly educated, and conversant with many languages, can hardly have been less than thirty at the time of Miss Schaw’s visit, even though Miss Schaw does speak of him in one place as a “young fellow.” We have no details of his early life, beyond the fact that he had been employed by “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grenville” in the West Indies (and if George Grenville is meant, this employment must have been before 1765) and it is possible that he there came into touch with the Martin family. He wrote to John Wilmot in 1788, “I had long been honored with the particular friendship of the deceased governor Martin on his being appointed to the government of North Carolina and, as I was at that time a young man without fixed line of employment, he in warmest and most friendly manner invited me to join him in his province. I accordingly joined him and lived with him in the most confidential manner. I was, so far as consisted, privy to the measures of his government, in forwarding many of which he did me the honour of calling on my services” (Audit Office Papers).</p>
				<p>Neilson arrived in the province in 1771 and lived at New Bern, in the governor’s “palace” with Martin for four years, acting at times as his secretary. He was serving in that capacity when the troubles broke out in March, 1775, and in May aided Martin to escape in that eventful flight from New Bern to Fort Johnston, which cost Martin his influence in the province. He aided also <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin and the children to make their way to New York, securing the vessel and seeing them safely on board. Free then from further obligation to remain at New Bern and “after some various escapes from the popular fury,” one or two of which Miss Schaw recounts, he was obliged to take refuge with the governor on board the Cruizer, and there he remained until he left the province in November, 1775.</p>
				<p>Neilson was appointed to the clerkship of the courts by Martin, an appointment contested by the assembly, and he also held an agency under the governor for the Granville Grant, neither of which offices seems to have netted him anything in the way of financial return. In January, 1775, on the death of Isaac Edwards, the deputy auditor, Martin appointed Neilson in his stead, and later, in October, while both were on board the Cruizer and after Samuel Johnston, the naval officer, had shown his strong prediliction for the revolutionary cause by acting as moderator of the provincial congress, Martin suspended Johnston and gave Neilson his place. But the progress of the Revolution destroyed the value of both offices, the emoluments from which came from fees; and it is noteworthy that when in the summer of 1775 one Pryce arrived from England with deputations as provincial secretary and deputy auditor, he was so alarmed at the disorder of the country and disgusted with the climate that he returned to England without even calling on the governor (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 237, 263, 269, 332).</p>
				<p>Neilson had no property in the colony, except two houses, two negroes, some furniture and books, all of which he left behind, “being obliged to flee suddenly.” It is at least worthy of remark that he should have taken no advantage of his intimacy with the governor to obtain land or accumulate wealth by any of those means which place-seekers of the time knew so well how to utilize.</p>
				<p>Miss Schaw adds greatly to our knowledge of Neilson’s activities during the summer and autumn of 1775 and of his experiences with her and Fanny in the city of Lisbon. After returning from Portugal in January or February, 1776, he went to London, where he applied to Lord Dartmouth for a commissaryship or some similar post in the British army in America, his first letter being dated May 7, from “15 Orange Street, Leicester Fields.” He was evidently unsuccessful in his application, for in the same year the Treasury granted him a temporary relief, on his offering to go as a volunteer to New York. At this crisis, however, his brother died at Dundee, leaving a widow and nine children, the eldest only thirteen, and Neilson was obliged to return to Scotland in order to care for an aged mother, two sisters, a sister-in-law, and all the children. There he remained until the end of his life. All further applications to the Loyalist Claims Commission had to be made in writing, subscribed under oath before the chief magistrate of the royal borough of Dundee. In 1783 he was awarded a yearly allowance of £60, which he drew regularly until his death in 1805. In the Loyalist Quarterly Pension Books the name of his attorney appears every quarter, until in the entries for January, 1806, the word “dead” is written in pencil at the side of his name and no payment is inserted in the column (Treas. 50: 20). He never married.</p>
				<p>During his life in the colony Neilson was on terms of friendship with Samuel Johnston and James Iredell and probably others. McRee in his life of Iredell prints a number of his letters, which show the keenness and vigor of his thought and the wide scope of his reading. In commenting upon him, McRee justly says, “He was, undoubtedly, one of the most highly cultivated men of his day and region, and though an adherent of government, highly esteemed by Iredell and Johnston” (Life of Iredell, I, 201⁠–⁠202).</p>
			</section>
			<section id="appendices-14" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>. Captain John Abraham Collet.</h3>
				<p>(Captain John Abraham Collet may well be deemed the villain of this phase of the story, for, though possessing many natural gifts, he was domineering and unprincipled and has received little commendation from either party in the struggle. He has, however, been treated more harshly than was necessary by North Carolina historians who, following contemporary revolutionary opinion, have given him no credit for his successful handling of a difficult situation. Furthermore, North Carolina owes him something for the excellent maps that he prepared of the province⁠—maps not generally known and never reproduced to our knowledge. One was engraved and published; the other two, now in the British Museum, with photographic copies at Raleigh and in the Library of Congress, still remain in manuscript. Of the latter, the smaller covers the lower Cape Fear; the larger, Albemarle and the back country.</p>
				<p>Captain Collet before coming to North Carolina had served six campaigns in Germany and later for four years studied mathematics, engineering, and drawing. On May 27, 1767, he was commissioned commander of Fort Johnston, and in August embarked for North Carolina, delivering his credentials to Governor Tryon in December. He was discouraged at the miserable condition of the fort and the insufficient allowance made for its maintenance, and as an ad interim employment accepted Tryon’s invitation to accompany him as his aide-de-camp on the expedition against the Regulators in 1768. In December of that year he returned to England, having in the meantime surveyed the province and completed a map of it, “which he afterward had the honour of presenting to His Majesty and upon the publication of which he actually lost £500.” (Testimony before the Loyalist Claims Commission.) This map, engraved by Bayley, was published May 1, 1770, by S. Hooper, Ludgate Hill, London.</p>
				<p>Though Collet carried to England recommendations from Tryon to Hillsborough, he was unsuccessful in obtaining preferment. While in England he was employed in drawing until in 1772 he was ordered by the secretary of state for the colonies to return to America and take up his post at Fort Johnston. In the meantime Governor Martin had endeavored to impress upon the assembly the necessity of making an adequate appropriation for charges and maintenance of the fort, but with slight success. Collet reached the country in 1773, and with the governor’s approval “spared neither time nor pains to put [the fort] into substantial repair” and, according to his own statement, continued to maintain it at his own expense up to 1775. Martin and Collet were in fact on the horns of a dilemma: the assembly would do nothing because Collet was a British officer; and Secretary Dartmouth would do nothing because the fort “seemed calculated merely for the security and convenience of the commerce of the colony” (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 1008).</p>
				<p>From the end of 1774 Collet was harassed “in every way the Americans could devise; they cut off his usual channels for provisions, and by great premiums and promises seduced his men to desert and after the first bloodshed at Lexington they declared open hostilities and more destruction to the garrison.” As early as March, 1775, the rumor spread that the fort was to be attacked and Collet and his lieutenant, Richard Wilson, prepared for its defence. This activity, coupled with other rumors, true and false, convinced the Wilmington committee that it would be necessary to capture the fort and if possible to take Martin and Collet into custody. The attacking force numbered five hundred; for defence Collet had twenty-five men, reduced by desertion to less than half that number, of whom only three or four were to be depended on. The artillery was useless for want of powder. When it became evident that the fort could not hold out, Martin retired on board the man-of-war and ordered Collet and Wilson to dismantle the fort, save the guns, and embark for Boston. This they did, July 21, 1775, delivering to General Gage “a very valuable and costly set of artillery, arms, stores, and ammunition belonging to the Crown.” While waiting on the transport, Collet saw his own property destroyed, losing, according to his own estimate, in house and stable, horses, cattle, carriages, hay, liquors, and furniture upward of £5,900, with a total loss of “at least £10,000” (Audit Office Papers). Wilson, likewise, lost a house and stable, three saddle horses, and other property worth £400 (Second Report, Ontario Bureau of Archives, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1207). The attacking party, not content with the destruction of the fort and the houses belonging to it, shortly afterwards tarred and feathered the gunner “for expressing his loyalty,” and “so grossly insulted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mulligan in particular, surgeon to the forts and garrisons in this province [South Carolina], that he was under necessity of taking refuge on board the King’s ship till the packet boat sailed” (Lord William Campbell to Lord Dartmouth, South Carolina, August 19, 1775). Collet, after his arrival in Boston, continued in military service till the end of the war. He joined the Royal Fencible Americans, a loyalist regiment, served under Lieutenant Colonel Gorham at Fort Cumberland, Nova Scotia, 1777⁠–⁠1780, and at Fort Howe, 1781 (Loyalist Muster Rolls, <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, 1777⁠–⁠1783). Of his career after his return to England we know nothing.</p>
				<p>Collet had conspicuous faults and Governor Martin made no effort to minimize them. He charges Collet with extravagance and with conduct based upon his own gain rather than “upon any principles of justice, equity, and charity.” He says that Collet was heavily in debt and contemptuous of the efforts which his creditors made to secure payment; that he was hotheaded and impetuous and so scornful of the colonials generally as to exasperate them against him. Though Martin did not believe, and probably with reason, the report that Collet was harboring and arming negroes at the fort and inciting them to insurrection, he was convinced that Collet was the wrong man for the place and hoped that he would never return to the colony.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
