<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Burntisland is a seaport of county Fife, on the north side of the Firth of Forth, five miles across from Leith and Edinburgh. As there was a ferry from Leith, it is quite probable that Miss Schaw and her party drove to Leith in carriages and there boarded the ferryboat for Burntisland. The seaport has an excellent harbour and was a favorite anchorage for vessels entering or leaving the firth, but the fact that the owner of the vessel lived at Burntisland may furnish an additional reason for the place of departure. Some of the Scottish regiments serving in the Revolutionary War sailed from this port, and as early as 1627 we meet with a vessel called the Blessing of Burntisland. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Schaw was accompanied by her brother, Alexander, and by the three children of John Rutherfurd, of North Carolina⁠—Fanny, aged eighteen or nineteen, John Jr., aged eleven, and William Gordon, aged nine, all of whom, though born in North Carolina, had been sent to Scotland in 1767 for their education. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scotland. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “best of brothers” was, of course, Alexander; “the other, lost from childhood,” was Miss Schaw’s brother Robert, probably older than herself. Later in the narrative, she says that he “had not seen a bleaching-washing since he was a boy,” which would mean that he must have left Scotland at a very early age. For a further account of him, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>* “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mary” was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mary Miller, Miss Schaw’s waiting woman, who accompanied her mistress on her travels. Whether she attended Miss Schaw during her Lisbon sojourn is doubtful (see below, page 210, note). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “Channel” is the Firth of Forth. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The captain was Thomas Smith, and the vessel a brig or frigate of eighty tons, built in Massachusetts in 1772 and registered at Kirkcaldy, a seaport of Fife, northeast of Burntisland and the nearest port with a naval office. Captain Smith had registered the vessel on October 22, three days before sailing (see below, page 144, note). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The owner of the ship, the Jamaica Packet, was George Parker, who had lived in Wilmington from 1762 to 1771 as a householder and merchant, and was well known to Rutherfurd and the Schaws. He had been a town commissioner in 1764, and in 1766, as owner of the ship Nancy, had taken part in the protest against the stamps during the Stamp Act troubles. In 1771 he decided to leave Wilmington and go to Burntisland, where he had a brother. Consequently, he sold his house on Market Street, his lands, negroes, pettiauger, furniture, chaise, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, for £910 (Wilmington, Register’s Office, Conveyances, F, 157⁠–⁠160) and returned to Scotland. He seems to have been under some obligation to Rutherfurd, but in his dealings with Miss Schaw and her party showed very little honesty or friendship. There are references to him in the Brunswick County Records, Conveyances, A, 129⁠–⁠130, the North Carolina Colonial Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 177⁠–⁠178, and the Wilmington Town Records. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexander was going out as searcher of customs at <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Steerage” in the sailing vessels of the day was the space below decks aft, that is, in the stern of the vessel. The accommodations, as the narrative shows, were straitened and uncomfortable. “Steerage passengers” are mentioned quite early in the eighteenth century. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Yahoos of Gulliver’s Travels are described as brutes with human forms and vicious and uncleanly habits. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the highland emigration of these years, see Appendix I. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though it is hardly possible to recover the name of the supercargo, his character as “a republican and a violent American” is a sufficient indentification. He will be met with again (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 64, 65). It is evident that Miss Schaw did not like him, deeming him a silly fellow and a fool.</p>
					<p>A “supercargo” was an officer of a merchant ship who was entrusted with the sale of the cargo and other commercial transactions. Such an officer required not only a knowledge of business, but also a certain amount of diplomatic skill to deal with extraordinary situations. The following explanation of the origin of this functionary is given by an old American naval commander. “Captains of ships were not often educated men; they began to go to sea very young, they learned just enough to navigate their ships in the simple way and with the crude instruments of that day. They could handle their ships under all circumstances and they were proficients with lead and line, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but they were not merchants, and generally knew nothing about buying and selling cargoes; consequently it was necessary that a merchant should go with the ship to do the cargo-selling and buying, and that man was the Supercargo. They were always men of mercantile education, often of extensive education, collegiate, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> At sea, after preparing their accountbooks, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, they had little to do and they often learned to handle the ship, to navigate, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and became expert seamen. Bowditch, whose work on Navigation [1802] is the basis of most navigation books and whose own work is used by three-fourths of the navigators of the world, was the supercargo of a ship. He learned seamanship for want of something else to do. He was a college graduate and stood high as a mathematician, and when he took up navigation on board the ship he found the methods in use were crude and erroneous and he proposed to make new rules and processes and actually did make new rules from day to day, which the captain used and pronounced much better than the old methods.” Letter from Commander Edward Hooker, November 9, 1894 (Connecticut Historical Society). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Teague” was a word for a simple, unsophisticated Irishman, used generally in a half contemptuous sense. In origin the name was that of a faithful Irish servant, blundering and inefficient, one of the characters in Sir Robert Howard’s comedy, “The Committee” (1665). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At this point the route of the vessel is obscured by Miss Schaw’s confusion of the Orkney and Shetland Islands. The islands they had “just passed” were not the Shetlands but the Orkneys, from one of which the Lawsons and others must have come. Miss Schaw could not have seen the Shetlands at all, for the next land, which the vessel must have passed on the south side, was the Fair Isle, a small island three miles long and two broad, lying midway between the two larger groups. The “safe basin” referred to was the only harbor that the island possessed, a shallow indentation on the eastern side, rarely, if ever, frequented by ships. All habitations were on the south, so that in watching what was going on Miss Schaw stood at the rail facing north. An excellent map and description of this Fair Isle may be found in Tudor, The Orkneys and Shetland, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We have been unable to identify the “cruel Author of all their woes,” though the reference seems very specific and the charge is directed against a very definite and seemingly prominent person. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There seems to be no way of identifying Miss Forbes <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By the “last war in America” probably the French and Indian War is meant. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dead lights were the heavy double windows or shutters put up outside the cabin windows to keep out the water in case of a storm. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Twelve days have passed. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reference is to Lord Kames’s Elements of Criticism, three volumes, Edinburgh, 1762. There was a third edition with additions, published in 1765, in two volumes. An American edition in one volume was issued in 1871. Henry Home, Lord Kames, was a judge of the court of sessions in Scotland, who died in 1782. He was a well-known barrister, judge, and writer, who tried several cases in which some of those who emigrated to North Carolina⁠—James Hogg, for example⁠—were plaintiffs. There is a good account of him in the Dictionary of National Biography and records of cases tried before him can be found in the Scots Magazine. Boswell, in recording <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s prejudices against Scotland, cites his opinion of Kames. “But Sir,” said Boswell, “we have Lord Kames.” “You have Lord Kames” (replied Johnson), “keep him, ha, ha, ha! We don’t envy you him” (Boswell’s Life, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 54).</p>
					<p>The books in the cabin were brought on board by Alexander Schaw for the use of the party. They were left at <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher on his departure from that island in January, 1775, but whether afterwards recovered or not we cannot say. Alexander Schaw’s will (1810) mentions books among his possessions. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A jury mast was one rigged for temporary service in an emergency. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Greenock, at the mouth of the Clyde, is the seaport of Glasgow. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Highlanders had bound themselves to the master of the ship in return for their food and transportation. Thus they had become indentured servants, whose time for four, five, or six years might be sold on their arrival in the colony to whomsoever would buy. The buying of these indentures or contracts was a recognized method of obtaining laborers in nearly all the British colonies in America, West Indian and continental alike. The hardships involved and the extent to which the servants suffered practical slavery differed with the period and the colony. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A cant word for mistaking a cloud for land. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thomas Salmon, A New Geographical and Historical Grammar, with a set of twenty-two maps, London, octavo, 1749. Sixth edition, 1758. There were later editions also. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The knowledge of languages possessed by Alexander Schaw and Miss Schaw’s later friend, Archibald Neilson (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 218⁠–⁠221), is suggestive of the culture of Edinburgh and other lowland Scottish towns at this time. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Scottish word meaning the improved grounds around a country house. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Mediterranean pass was a necessary document for all ships, British and colonial, trading in the Mediterranean or along the Atlantic coast, north and south of the Straits of Gibraltar. It was a permit on parchment, partly engraved and partly written, issued by the British Admiralty to protect vessels from attack by the Barbary cruisers, under the terms of treaties previously entered into with the Barbary states. A single pass could be used for more than one voyage. Under Admiralty rules, it was to be endorsed by the British consul at every port entered and when done with to be returned to the issuing office.</p>
					<p>The form and wording were as follows:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>[King of England, <abbr>etc.</abbr>] to all persons whom these may concern greeting.</p>
						<p>Suffer the ship ⸻ to pass, with her company, passengers, goods, and merchandizes, without any let, hinderance, seizure, or molestation; the said ship appearing unto us, by good testimony, to belong to our subjects, and to no foreigner. Given under our sign manual and the seal of the Admiralty, at the court at ⸻, this ⸻ day of ⸻, in the year of our Lord, one thousand and seven hundred and ⸻.</p>
						<p>By his Majesty’s Command,</p>
						<p>[Signature of the Secretary to the Admiralty] [Signature of the King]</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is today no “<abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas” among the Azores; the reference may be to the island of Terceira. “Pecoa” is now Pico. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Five days have elapsed. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The incident of meeting the Boyne offers the only serious difficulty that we have encountered in reconciling the statements of the journal with the evidence from other sources. Miss Schaw says definitely that they met the Boyne on December 3, the log of the Boyne says with equal definiteness that that vessel “spoke a brigg for Antigo com’d from Leith” on November 17, a discrepancy of more than two weeks. Either Miss Schaw is wrong in her date or the entry in the log concerns another vessel than the Jamaica Packet. The former is the more likely explanation, as the Boyne “saw Cape Ann,” that is, the coast of Massachusetts, on December 7, which would have been impossible had she been seen by the packet on December 3.</p>
					<p>The captain of the Boyne, whom Miss Schaw so vigorously condemns, was Broderick Hartwell. Had she and others on the packet, particularly that violent republican, the supercargo, though aware that the Boyne was taking soldiers to America, foreseen the part that those soldiers were to play in American history, they might have been more lively in their comments. The Boyne, the Asia, which carried Major Pitcairn, and the Somerset, which was the consort referred to, were transporting the marine detachments that fought in the battles of Lexington, Concord, and Bunker Hill. Miss Schaw, without realizing it, had witnessed a significant event in the history of the American Revolution.</p>
					<p>Oddly enough, “little Billie” was gazing at a vessel bearing the same name as that on which he was to serve as acting lieutenant in 1794, nineteen years later. The Boyne of 1774 was a third-rate of 74 guns and 300 men; that of 1794 was the flagship of Sir John Jervis (afterwards Admiral Earl <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent), a second-rate of 98 guns and 772 men, which was commissioned in 1792 and sailed from England with “little Billie” on board in November, 1793. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The pilot fish was so called because often seen with a shark, swimming near a ship, from which the sailors imagined that it acted as a pilot to the shark. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Grampus. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is, a mock divorce suit. In eighteenth century Scottish law a commissary court was a probate and divorce court. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The jolly boat was generally slung at the stern of the vessel.</p>
					<p>Regarding the “awful ceremony,” the author of A Brief Account of the Island of Antigua (1789), who made the voyage from the Downs to Antigua in 1786, says, “I had almost forgot to observe that on passing the tropic of Cancer, the old custom of ducking and shaving such as have not before crossed it, was performed by the seamen with some humour on one man and two boys. The passengers waved the ceremony by a liquor fine” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 5). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Evidently meaning that if the sailors would give up their claim to the clothes of the emigrants, he (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schaw) would pay for their grog. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dunkeld is a town in Perthshire on the west branch of the Tay. It was formerly the home of the Duchess of Atholl (<abbr>p.</abbr> 243) and quite possibly had been at one time the home of Miss Schaw. The scenery, both above and below the town, was greatly admired. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The author of the Brief Account says, “The new barracks and military hospital, situated to the eastward of the town, are spacious and healthy and allowed to be the most complete in the islands. There is also a barrack on Rat Island, in <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Harbour, but it has been suffered to go to ruin and is now [1786] out of use.” The “high rock,” to which Miss Schaw refers is Rat Island; the barracks there, built in 1754⁠–⁠1755, were evidently occupied at the time of her arrival, for the new barracks could hardly have been completed in 1774. According to Sir Ralph Payne, governor at this time, the barracks contained four companies of the 2nd Battalion of Royal Americans, exceedingly incomplete as to numbers, since they amounted to not more than 87 or 88 effective men. These companies had come to the island in 1772, replacing the 68th Regiment of Foot, which had been there since 1764. The regulars were quite distinct from the local militia, which at its full strength numbered about 800 men. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antigua is one of the Leeward Islands, forty miles east of Nevis and twenty-seven miles from Montserrat. Its chief town, <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, was not incorporated until July, 1783.</p>
					<p>The best contemporary description of the island is that contained in Sir Ralph Payne’s “Answers to Queries,” written on June 26, 1774. Just three months before the lady’s arrival. “Antigua is in its greatest extent about 14 miles in length and in its narrowest breadth about 5 miles. Its highest hills are to the southward, but it is in general by no means a mountainous island. It contains 69,277 acres and 108 square miles and ¼. The soil on the north side is a black mould or marie, and to the southward a strong clay. The body of the island lies in latitude 17″ 10′ and its longitude from the meridian of London is 60 degrees west. The climate of Antigua as well as of the other Leeward Islands, is between the Tropics under the Torrid Zone, and like the other islands would be insufferably warm, were it not for almost constant breezes that blow chiefly from the eastward, and render it healthy and agreeable” (Public Record Office, C. O. 152:54, no. 17). The number of its white inhabitants in 1774 was about 2590, of blacks 37,308. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>October 25 to December 12. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sangaree was a tropical drink, known also to the people of the Carolinas. There were other combinations than that mentioned by Miss Schaw, but the ingredients were always liquor, water, and spices. Brandy was sometimes substituted for wine. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “old lady” was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dunbar, as was also the doctor’s wife. There was no relationship between them. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> John Dunbar (born 1721), member of the assembly until 1775, graduated at Leyden University in 1742, and married, in Antigua, Eleanor, daughter of Thomas Watkins, who died during the hurricane of August 31, 1772. He married again, July 28, 1773, at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, Sarah Warner, daughter of Samuel H. Warner, deputy provost marshal of the island, a woman much younger than himself, who, however, died before he did, in 1787. The Dunbar plantation of 165 acres was in the Dickinson Bay division, from which the doctor was returned to the assembly. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Capt.</abbr> James Blair may have been an officer of the Royal American battalion, but his name cannot be found in any of the printed or manuscript army lists. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The two boys must have found the greater part of the seven weeks’ voyage a veritable Lent. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Hob and nob” was to drink to the health of the company present. At many colonial dinners it was the custom for the host to drink a glass of wine with everyone at the table. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Halliday family is of old covenanting stock and has figured in the history of Scotland, county Galloway, since the sixteenth century. John Halliday, the collector, was born in Antigua, a nephew of William Dunbar and a son-in-law of Francis Delap, both prominent residents of the island. He himself had no less than seven plantations in the different divisions, the two most important of which were “Boons” in <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s parish and “Weatherills” near by. He entered the assembly in 1755, resigned in 1757, and was again returned in 1761. He occupied the position of customs collector and receiver of the four and a half percent export duty from 1759 to 1777, an office of importance, as the port of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s was much superior to its only rival in the island, Parham.</p>
					<p>Of Charles Baird, the comptroller, we can give no information beyond that which Miss Schaw furnishes, though his name is to be found in the official list of customs officials and in Governor Payne’s “Answers to Queries.” <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Samuel Martin, the “young Martin” here mentioned, was not a son of Colonel Samuel, though he may have been in some way related to him. That there was some family connection seems evident from an agreement entered into in 1775, whereby young Samuel bound himself to pay annuities to certain members of the Martin family (Oliver, History of Antigua, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 245). At this time he may have been twenty or more years of age, and, as Miss Schaw thought would be the case, he succeeded Halliday as collector two years later, serving until 1795, when he was retired. He was followed by Josiah, Colonel Samuel’s grandson, who held the office for half a century.</p>
					<p>For a woman hater, young Samuel had an interesting matrimonial career. In 1777, the year he was appointed collector, he married Grace Savage, daughter of George Savage of “Savage Gardens” just outside <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, and by her had six children. She died, aged 50, in 1810, and in 1812 he married again, a widow, name unknown, by whom he had five children more. Thus he had two wives and eleven children, which is a little unexpected, in view of Miss Schaw’s remarks. He died soon after 1825, in England, whither he had gone after leaving the collectorship.</p>
					<p>Young Martin’s plantation in Antigua was called “High Point” and lay in the northern part of the island, between Winthrop’s Bay and Dutchman’s Bay near the entrance to Parham Harbor. He left this plantation to William, born in 1816, his second son by his second wife. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “Jock Trumble” here mentioned was probably Lieutenant John Turnbull of the 68th Regiment of Foot, who died in Antigua, October $, 1767, and was buried on the island. The name “Trumbull” is but a corrupted form of the Scottish “Turnbull,” and Scotsmen tell us that the name today is frequently spelled “Turnbull” and pronounced “Trumbull.” <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Antigua has but one running stream and that is incapable of the least navigation” (Payne in “Answers to Queries”). Of the water supply the writer of the Brief Account says, “This island is almost destitute of fresh springs, therefore the water principally used is rain, which the inhabitants collect in stone cisterns; this water, after being drawn from the reservoir, is filtered through a Barbadoes stone, which renders it free from animalcula, or any disagreeable quality it might have contracted by being kept in the tank. It is exceedingly soft and well flavored⁠ ⁠… as good as any I ever tasted in Europe” (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 60⁠–⁠61).</p>
					<p>Governor Payne, writing to Lord Dartmouth the October before, gives a description of the island that is equally flattering with that of Miss Schaw. “I have no disagreeable account of any kind wherewith I am to trouble your Lordship, from any part of my government. The crops of the present year which are just finished have in general been very good; and in some of the islands surpass’d the expectations of the planters; and the present propitious weather inspires the inhabitants with sanguine hopes of reaping a plentiful harvest in the ensuing year. There is not in any of the islands under my command any interruption to the general harmony and tranquillity which I have the satisfaction of observing to prevail throughout every part of my government, from my first entrance on my administration”; and in January, 1775, he added, “No mischievous sparks of the continental flame have reached any district of the government. The trade of every island of it is most uncommonly flourishing. Provisions of all kinds from the continent of America are cheaper and more plentiful than they have been in the memory of man” (Public Record Office, C. O. 152:55). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The mosquitoes on the American continent as well as in the West Indies were a very troublesome novelty to Europeans. The author of the Brief Account says of Antigua, “The mosketos are troublesome, but I defend my legs (which is the part these insects principally attack) with boots” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 7).</p>
					<p>As to the continental colonies, Boucher complained of mosquitoes in Maryland (Maryland Magazine, March, 1913, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 39⁠–⁠40), Michel in Virginia (Virginia Magazine, January, 1916, <abbr>p.</abbr> 40), and Beverley of the latter colony once sent for Russian lawn or gauze for four large field beds, “being to let in the air and keep out mosquitoes and flies” (Beverley Letter Book). Peckover, the travelling Quaker preacher, says that he was “taken with an inflamation in my leg” in New Jersey, “occasioned I think by the Muskittos biting me. This is a very flat country and very subject to these insects” (Travels). In North Carolina, mosquito nets were included in inventories and invoices, and in South Carolina in 1744, it was proposed that the merchants in England send over a large quantity of Scotch kenting for pavilions, as it would come to a good market, “there being at present a great demand for that commodity, the inhabitants being almost devoured by the mosquitos for want thereof:” (South Carolina Gazette, June 6, 1744). Even the Pilgrims were “much anoyed with muskeetoes,” and some of those who returned before 1624 made them a subject of complaint against the colony. Bradford’s History (Ford <abbr>ed.</abbr>), I, 366, and note. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is not in genteel houses however. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fire occurred on August 17, 1769, and consumed two-thirds of the town, at a loss of £400,000 Antigua currency.</p>
					<p>The hurricane occurred on August 31, 1772. Of this terrible disaster Governor Payne wrote: “On Thursday night, the 27th of August, we had an exceedingly hard gale of wind, which continued for the space of 7 or 8 hours, and then subsided without doing any material damage. On the night of Sunday, the 30th of August, the wind blew fresh⁠ ⁠… and continued increasing till five in the morning when it blew a hurricane from the N. E⁠ ⁠… a melancholy darkness prevail’d for more than an hour after sun rise. At eight o’clock the fury of the tempest in some measure abated, but it was only to collect new redoubl’d violence, and to display itself, with tenfold terror, for the space of 4 hours⁠ ⁠… Some persons were buried in the ruins of their houses. Many houses were razed. The doors, windows, and partitions of the Court House were blown in, the interior completely wrecked and most valuable papers destroyed. The barracks are in a deplorable condition. At English Harbour, deemed stormproof, there was a squadron under Adml Parry, whose flagship with others drove ashore and the hospital there was levelled to the ground, crushing in its fall the unfortunate patients and attendants. My new study, with most of my papers, was blown away.” Quoted in Oliver, History of Antigua, I, cxxi.</p>
					<p>There is an old negro adage regarding the coming of hurricanes: “June, too soon; July, stand by; August, come it must; September, remember; October, all over.” <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Ralph Payne, governor of the Leeward Islands, with residence in Antigua, was born in <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, in 1739. He was commissioned governor May 10, 1771, resigned February 17, 1775, and returned soon after to England. “Hardly any West Indian governor,” says the author of the Brief Account, “ever acquired credit there except Sir George Thomas and Sir Ralph Payne. These men were both native West Indians, who knew the disposition of the people they had to govern, and by prudently keeping the arrogant at as great a distance, as the more modest would naturally keep themselves, they had the good fortune to be approved” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 166). Lord Dartmouth said that Sir Ralph had “ever shown a zeal and activity that is highly pleasing to the king”; and in August, 1775, after he had left the island and another appointee was under consideration, the general assembly of Antigua presented an address to the king, expressing their gratitude for his having sent them a man of Sir Ralph’s character and worth and begging that he would send him back to them again.</p>
					<p>Governor Payne had a career in England also. He was an <abbr class="initialism">M.P.</abbr> for Plymouth in 1762, Shaftesbury, 1769, and Camelford, 1774. He was made a <abbr class="initialism">K.B.</abbr> in 1771, and on October <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1795, was created an Irish peer, Baron Lavington of Lavington, entering the Privy Council in 1799. He was reappointed governor of Antigua, January 20, 1799, and died in the island, August 3, 1807, aged 68. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Right Honorable William Lord Mansfield was the fourth son of David Murray, Viscount Stormont, and brother of the <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Murray of Stormont mentioned later in the narrative (<abbr>p.</abbr> 247). He was born at Scone, educated at Perth, and formed part of that Scottish circle of intimates in which Miss Schaw moved. He is frequently referred to, here and elsewhere, as giving assistance of one kind or another to his Scottish friends. His judicial and parliamentary career is too well known to need comment. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mackinnen was Louise Vernon of Hilton Park, Stafford, who had married William Mackinnen of Antigua in 1757. Mackinnen was an absentee planter for many years, but returned to the island in 1773, and became a member of the council. He went back to England some time before 1798, lived at Exeter, and died in 1809. He was buried at Binfield, Berks, where he had a residence. In Antigua, he had two plantations, “Golden Grove” and “Mackinnen’s,” the latter, an estate of 830 acres in <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s parish, is probably the one visited by Miss Schaw. There were four daughters. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dunbar’s plantation, “Eleanora,” lay about two miles north of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, a mile farther on than that of William Mackinnen. Both were in the Dickinson Bay division. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is of course impossible to identify Fanny’s boarding school, but the following entry in the Scots Magazine (36, <abbr>p.</abbr> 392) may well refer to it. “Miss Sarah Young, daughter of Patrick Young of Killicanty, [who] kept a boarding school in Edinburgh for young ladies upwards of thirty years,” died on July 30, 1774. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Church was built in the years 1740⁠–⁠1745, the tower, which had not been erected when Miss Schaw visited the island, being added in 17861789. The building occupied a conspicuous position on an eminence in the northeast quarter of the town and was visible from all the country round. It was built of brick and stone, its yard being enclosed by a brick wall, the bricks having been obtained in England and America. On pillars at the south entrance were two well executed figures in Portland stone of <abbr>St.</abbr> John the Baptist and <abbr>St.</abbr> John the Evangelist, to whom the church was dedicated, and in the tower were a clock and a bell given in 1789 by John Delap Halliday, son of the collector. The organ had been purchased in 1760 and in 1772 an organist, George Harland Hartley, was installed. The rector, whom Miss Schaw so much disliked, was the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Bowen, 1767⁠–⁠1783 (Oliver, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, 357⁠–⁠3595 Brief Account, <abbr>p.</abbr> 21). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Digges, see below, <abbr>p.</abbr> 136. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Alexander Webster (1707⁠–⁠1784) was chaplain in ordinary for Scotland in 1771 and a dean of the royal chapel. His son, Lieutenant Colonel William Webster, served in the British army in America and was wounded at Guilford Court House. Later he died of his wounds and was buried at Elizabeth, Bladen county, North Carolina. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Forbidden fruit” is a small variety of shaddock, so called because it is supposed to resemble the forbidden fruit of the Garden of Eden. The granadilla is the fruit of a species of passion flower (Passiflora quadrangularis), often six to eight inches in diameter. Miss Schaw anticipates the modern liking for the alligator pear. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The cassada or cassava is a fleshy root, the sweet variety of which is still used for food. The writer of the Brief Account gives nearly the same list of fruits as does Miss Schaw, and of the cassava says, “Cassava (commonly called Cassada) is a species of bread made from the root of a plant of the same name, by expression. The water, or juice, is poisonous, but the remaining part after being dried, or baked on thick iron plates, is both wholesome and palatable, it is eaten dry or toasted, and it also makes excellent puddings” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 63; <abbr>cf.</abbr> 64⁠–⁠67, 68⁠–⁠72). The Antigua plantation of Abraham Redwood, of Rhode Island, who founded the Redwood Library at Newport, was called “Cassada Garden.” It was in <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s parish. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There was no act of parliament forbidding sugar-refining in the West Indies, but the British refiners objected strongly to the West Indian planters’ entering into competition with themselves (since under the mercantilist scheme they should send to England only raw materials) and endeavored to discourage it in every way possible. Sugar-refining was deemed a form of manufacturing, in which the colonists were not expected to engage. Generally speaking, treatment in the West Indies of the raw juice of the sugar cane went no farther than the Muscovado process, which produced the various grades of brown sugar, with the byproduct, molasses. For a description of this process, see Aspinall, British West Indies, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 171⁠–⁠172; Jones and Scard, The Manufacture of Cane Sugar; and for a contemporary illustration of a sugar mill, Universal Magazine, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 103. This process is still continued on many West Indian estates, as it is much cheaper than the vacuum process and furnishes the market not only with molasses, but also with the old brown sugar, “sweetest of all and the delight of children for their bread and butter.” <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Dillidaff” is probably phonetic for Tullideph, a well-known Scottish name. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walter Tullideph of Antigua had two daughters, Charlotte, who married Sir John Ogilvy, and Mary, who married <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr>Col.</abbr> Alexander Leslie. After leaving <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s the party rode southward along the coast, turning eastward a mile or so to visit “Green Castle,” Colonel Martin’s estate in Bermudian Valley under Windmill Hill. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arthur Freeman was the eldest son and the heir-at-law of Thomas Freeman (died, 1736). He was born in 1724 and died January 30, 1780, aged 56. In 1765, when forty-one years old, he eloped with the youngest daughter of the governor, George Thomas, and went to England. Governor Thomas, a native of Antigua and deputy governor of Pennsylvania for nine years, had been appointed governor of the Leeward Islands in 1753. He retired in 1766, was made a baronet in the same year, and died in London, December 31, 1773, aged 79. He was so angry with Freeman for running off with his daughter, at that time but nineteen years old, that he suspended him from the council, giving the following elaborate statement of reasons.</p>
					<p>“In defiance of the laws of Great Britain and of this Island, in contempt of the respect due to him as his Majesty’s Governor in Chief of the Leeward Islands, and in violation of the laws of hospitality [Freeman] basely and treacherously seduced his daughter, of considerable pretensions, from the duty and obedience due to him as a most affectionate tender father, by prevailing on her to make a private elopement from his house, with assurances, from his uncommon indulgence, of an easy forgiveness and by bribing an indigent Scotch parson, who had been indebted to the general [Thomas] for his daily bread, to join them in marriage without licence or any other lawful authority, in hopes of repairing the said Freeman’s fortune, become desperate by a series of folly and extravagance” (Oliver, I, 266).</p>
					<p>The Privy Council in England, deeming the matter a private one, refused to support the action of the choleric old governor and restored Freeman to the council. He returned and took his seat in 1770. Apparently he left his wife in England, where she died in 1797, aged 52, for Miss Schaw’s account contains no hint of a wife. He must have gone back later, for he was buried in Willingdon Church, Sussex. For an intimate picture of Governor Thomas in Pennsylvania in 1744, see Hamilton’s Itinerarium (privately printed, 1907), PP. 25, 33, 35. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Patrick Malcolm was a surgeon of Antigua, who died in 1785. He had a diploma from Surgeons Hall, London, as had <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dunbar, and was licensed to practice in the island in 1749. That he was on terms of close intimacy with the Martins appears from the mention of his name several times in their wills. His relationship to the Rutherfurds we have not been able to discover. He may have been a brother of George Malcolm of Burnfoot in Dumfriesshire, who married Margaret, daughter of James Paisley of Craig and Burn near Langholm, and so have been connected with the Paisleys of Lisbon (below, <abbr>p.</abbr> 214). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, “The Martin Family.” <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In his Essay upon Plantership, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 2⁠–⁠7, Colonel Martin deals at length with the proper care of plantation negroes, and expresses opinions similar to those ascribed to him by Miss Schaw. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The son in Carolina was Governor Josiah Martin; the one in England, whose character Miss Schaw knew, was Samuel Martin, Josiah’s half-brother, who attained wide notoriety from his duel with John Wilkes. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Colonel Martin was one of those who foresaw the eventual decay of the industry of the island, because of its cultivation, to the exclusion of everything else, of the single staple, sugar. He wished to see some of the cane land converted into pasture for the rearing of sheep and cattle. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Till <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schaw be settled,” that is, till Alexander Schaw be definitely established in his post as searcher of customs at <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gideon Schaw of Lauriston, the father of Janet and Alexander, died January 19, 1772 (Scots Magazine, 34, <abbr>p.</abbr> 51). When he was born we do not know, but he was already married in 1726, for Patrick Walker, in his Biographia Presbyteriana (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 283⁠–⁠284), tells a grewsome tale of the execution and burial near Lauriston at that time of certain condemned persons, in connection with which he mentions both Gideon Schaw and his wife. In 1730 Gideon (or Gidjun) was appointed supervisor of the salt-duty at Alloa, the leading customs port at the head of the Firth of Forth, and there remained until 1734, when he removed to a similar post at Prestonpans, a smaller town below Leith. There he continued to live until 1738, when he was appointed collector of customs at Perth, at the head of the Firth of Tay, serving in that capacity until 1751, when he became assistant to Harnage, the register-general of tobacco in Scotland, with the title of assistant in Scotland to the register-general in England. His appointment was renewed in 1761 (on the accession of George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>) and he continued to serve until his death in 1772, residing in Lauriston. His salary, beginning at £30 a year, rose to £150 at the end, an amount not large even for those days. Miss Schaw in her journal frequently refers to Perth, the Tay, and the country about. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “tenah” was the negro woman’s headdress, composed of one or more handkerchiefs put on in the manner of a turban. An excellent description of the market is given by the author of the Brief Account. “This market is held at the southern extremity of the town⁠ ⁠… here an assemblage of many hundred negroes and mulattoes expose for sale poultry, pigs, kids, vegetables, fruit and other things; they begin to assemble by daybreak and the market is generally crowded by ten o’clock. This is the proper time to purchase for the week such things as are not perishable. The noise occasioned by the jabber of the negroes and the squalling and cries of the children basking in the sun exceeds anything I ever heard in a London market. About three o’clock the business is nearly over.” The writer goes on to discuss the obnoxious odors, the drinking of grog, the gambling and fighting, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which accompanied the holding of the market (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 139⁠–⁠141). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>White men’s God. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The militia of Antigua consisted of a troop of horse⁠—carabineers or light dragoons⁠—three regiments of foot, known as the red, blue, and green, one independent company of foot, and one company of artillery. Service in the militia was obligatory from 14 to 45. Colonel Martin was at the head of these forces for upwards of forty years. In 1773 Sir Ralph Payne became colonel of the carabineers. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> John Muir married Eleanor Knight in 1757. He died in 1798. Their daughters were Fanny’s boarding school acquaintances in Scotland and must have been about her own age. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Governor Payne’s correspondence confirms Miss Schaw’s statements in all particulars. The governor left Antigua with Lady Payne, in the summer of 1774, for a tour of the islands under his jurisdiction, and was away when Miss Schaw arrived. He was at <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher in October and soon afterwards at Montserrat, returning to Antigua after Christmas but before the end of the year. As his wife was in poor health, he had already applied to Lord Dartmouth for permission to go to England and found the secretary’s letter of consent awaiting him on his return. In a letter of February 7, 1775, he wrote Dartmouth: “Lord Mansfield’s intercession with your Lordship for his Majesty’s permission for me to conduct Lady Payne to England, for the reestablishment of her health, does me the greatest honour. I have indeed for a twelvemonth past entertained the most anxious desire of paying a short visit to England, but did [not make application] until the month of last October, when Lady Payne’s health appeared to me to have arrived at so dangerous a crisis (and my own was so materially impair’d as to create a despair in me of its reestablishment without the aid of a northern climate) that I determined to submit my domestic situation to your Lordship’s humanity” (Public Record Office, C. O. 152:55). He said further that Lady Payne had not quitted her bedchamber twice in the “last six weeks.” Dating back from February 7, this would bring the return to Antigua to December 27, two days after Christmas, which accords well with Miss Schaw’s remarks. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nevis, Montserrat, and <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The cisterns are thus described by a traveler. “The only water in this country fit for the use of men and animals is that which is collected in tanks or cisterns of mason-work, sunk underground, over which a concave stone or brick cover is usually placed, to collect the rain when it falls, with a hole in the centre for it to run through. They have also on every plantation large ponds lined with clay.” (Oliver, I, cxxx.) <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Many of these gentlemen-managers, as well as the overseers under them, contribute, in a great degree, to stock the plantation with mulatto and mestee slaves. It is impossible to say in what number they have such children, but the following fact is too often verified, ‘that, as soon as born, they are despised, not only by the very authors, under God, of their being, but by every white, destitute of humane and liberal principles,’ such is the regard paid to the hue of complexion in preference to the more permanent beauties of the mind” (Brief Account, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 45⁠–⁠46). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Creole is here used in its original meaning of any one born in the West Indies, irrespective of color. Aspinall says that a child born of white parents in Barbadoes, for example, was a ‘creole’ of that island and that the word is applied to animals and even to produce, it being not unusual to speak of a ‘creole’ pig or ‘creole’ corn (British West Indies, <abbr>p.</abbr> 149). We read also of ‘creole’ regiments (Calendar of State Papers, Colonial, 1702⁠–⁠1703, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 440, 441). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The ladies, inhabitants of this place, seldom walk the streets or ride in their wiskys, without masks or veils, not I presume, altogether as a preservative to their complexion, being frequently seen at a distance unmasked, but as soon as they are approached near, on goes the vizor, thro’ which, by a couple of peepholes, about the size of an English shilling, they have an opportunity of staring in the faces of all they meet. With you, this would be termed the grossest ill-manners, but here custom has established it, if not necessary as fashionable. Their dress is generally light, and inclined to tawdry, and their conversation languid, except when a little of that species of harmless chat, which ill-nature has called scandal, is busy in circulation, it is then they are volubile, it is then they are eloquent, it is then they are equal to any women in the world” (Brief Account, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35⁠–⁠36). Further comments on marriage, domestic life, abstemiousness, and virtue bear out Miss Schaw’s observations. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lutestring or lustring was a kind of glossy silk, much worn in the West Indies and the continental colonies. Tiffities or taffetas were a soft fine silk of many colors and varieties. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For “our Smith,” see <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55⁠–⁠56. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A cloak and hood resembling the dress of a Capuchin monk. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Saint Christopher,” says Governor Payne, in his “Answers to Queries,” “(the southeast part of which is divided from the northwest part of Nevis by a narrow channel of scarcely a league in breadth), lies in latitude 17″ 18′ north and longitude 62″ 40′ west from the meridian of London, and contains 68 square miles and 43,726 acres of land. Half of the island or thereabouts is an exceedingly fertile, gravelly and sandy soil; mix’d in some places with a very small proportion of clay, but without marie; and the soil of this nature produces sugar canes. The other half is no where so fertile nor is it at all fit for the cultivation of sugar canes: but in some parts of it are produc’d edible roots, and pulse of various kinds, together with some cotton and a small quantity of coffee and cocoa; and in other places, it is almost inaccessible from its situation on the sides and tops of steep mountains and craggy hills, which produce shrubs and different sorts of woods of little or no value. If any one of the islands deserves a preeminent character over the others for the salubrity of its air and the general health of its inhabitants, it is certainly Saint Christopher.”</p>
					<p>“Neither in Saint Christopher, Nevis, or Montserrat are there any harbours at all and the shipping of all sizes and denominations anchor in open roads and bays. There are at Saint Christopher 1900 white inhabitants, 417 free negroes and mulattoes, and 23,462 slaves.”</p>
					<p>“The principal port, Basseterre, on the southern side of the island, is divided into two parishes, Saint Peter Basseterre and Saint George Basseterre; the first is on low ground, the second slightly higher, both have less rain and suffer more by the want of it than the other [seven] parishes.” <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kinghorn was a seaport of Fife, a few miles east of Burntisland. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lady Isabella, or Lady Belle as she was commonly called, was Isabella Erskine, daughter of the 10th Earl of Buchan and sister of David Stuart, Lord Erskine, later the llth earl, the “fussy and intermeddling” patron of art, letters, and antiquities. Her other brothers were Henry, the lord advocate, and Thomas, the lord chancellor. She was married at Tunbridge Wells, England, January 21, 1770, to William Leslie Hamilton, a prominent planter and attorney of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, speaker of the house, member of the council, and attorney-general, 1779. In July of the latter year, on account of dangers attending the American War, Lady Belle returned to England in the Mary, Captain Beatty, and her husband followed her the next year. He landed at Portsmouth, October 5, 1780, but died suddenly at London, four days after his arrival, before his wife could reach his bedside (Gentleman’s Magazine, 1780, <abbr>p.</abbr> 495). Her brother, David, was the only member of the family present at the time of his death. On April 3, 1785, Lady Belle married again, the Right Honorable and Reverend John, last Earl of Glencairn, who died September 24, 1796. She herself died at Boulogne, May 17, 1824, without issue by either husband (id., 1824, <abbr>p.</abbr> 177)- For “Olivees” and Hamilton’s troubles during the war, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Davy in 1846 landed at Basseterre in an open boat (West Indies, <abbr>p.</abbr> 461). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The name of the Hamilton plantation was “Olivees,” the form of the word contained in Lady Isabella’s memorial. In the British Museum manuscript it is written “Olovaze” and in that of Colonel Vetch, “Olivese.” The word is evidently French in origin and was probably derived from the name of a previous owner. In 1704, Governor Codrington granted to Lieutenant David Dunbar, “for his service in the reduceing the French part of this Island,” the plantation of a M. Olivie of 150 acres, lying to the westward of Monkey Hill in Basseterre quarter (C. O. 152:42, no. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>). There can be little doubt that the plantation thus granted was the one which Miss Schaw visited and that the name “Olivees” means simply Olivie’s plantation. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parterres, that is, flower gardens. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Craister Greatheed was a prominent attorney and politician of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, comptroller of the customs and president of the council. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mt.</abbr> Misery is the name given to the mountainous centre of the island, which at its highest point reaches 3771 feet. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Scotchman was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Houston, son of the Alexander Houston mentioned on page 133. Miss Akres was probably a daughter of Aretas Akers of <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“There are three rivulets of excellent water which flow into the sea on the south west part of Saint Christopher” (Payne’s “Answers to Queries”). Taking the island as a whole, however, there are many streams of varying size, the larger of which are called “rivers,” the smaller “gutts” (Jeffrey’s West India Atlas). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Papa trees,” that is, the pawpaw or papaya tree, a palm-like tree bearing an oblong yellow fruit. “It has a slender and bare stem surmounted by a crown of large leaves, whose milky juice has marked digestive properties. The ripe fruit is a good substitute for the melon” (Aspinall, <abbr>p.</abbr> 115). Pawpaw trees are common in the United States, in the Middle West. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The buildings, on a sugar plantation, consist of a wind or cattle mill (sometimes both), a boiling house, a curing house, a house for fermenting the liquor or wash, from which rum is distilled. The great house where the proprietor generally resides, the manager’s house, houses for the overseers, store houses for grain, stock houses, and negroe huts. The negroe houses or huts are mostly built of stone, well thatched, and as dry and comfortable as any of that description in England” (Brief Account, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 85, 88). There is an excellent plan of a sugar plantation in Oliver, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 308⁠–⁠309. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Unluckily lost. [But an excellent chapter on sugar-making may be found in Colonel Martin’s Essay upon Plantership, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.] <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Schaw evidently had in mind that part of the Pythagorean system which concerns metempsychosis or the passing of the soul at death into another body, either human or animal. Something is wanting in the text here. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The English colonized <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher in 1623, the French in 1625. By mutual agreement they divided the island into four quarters, the French taking those at the ends, the English occupying those in the centre, with their headquarters at Old Road, Brimstone Hill, Sandy Point, and Palmetto Point. On the east, the French controlled Basseterre (later called by the British “Bastar”) and the peninsula towards Nevis, where lay the salt ponds. These they shared with the English, the latter having a path to them through the French grounds. The two peoples lived amicably side by side until 1666, when the French seized the English quarters and only restored them when compelled to do so by the Treaty of Breda. In 1689 they again occupied the English sections, but were driven out in 1690 by Governor Codrington, the elder. The status quo was restored by the Treaty of Ryswick in 1697. At the beginning of the war of the Spanish Succession the younger Codrington drove the French completely out of the island, but in 1705⁠–⁠1706, the French fleet reversed the situation and inflicted so much damage upon the planters of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher and Nevis that parliament appropriated more than £100,000 to cover their losses. The islands were given to England at the Treaty of Utrecht, in 1713, and the French resigned permanently all their claims (For the earlier period see Higham, Leeward Islands, 1660⁠–⁠1688). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Evidently Miss Schaw intended to return with her brother to <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher after leaving the children with their father in North Carolina, though it is not likely that she intended to remain there for any great length of time. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The books are manifestly those which Miss Schaw was reading on shipboard and which had been brought by Alexander for his use on the ship and at <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts. The reference to the paintings is obscure.</p>
					<p>Miss Milliken may have formed a part of the social group in Edinburgh to which both Lady Belle and Miss Schaw belonged and may have shared with them in devotion to literature, painting, and music, accomplishments common to all ladies of quality at this period of Scottish history, when culture in the Athens of the North reached the fullness of its blossoming and exercised its maximum influence. Miss Milliken was probably connected with the Millikens of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, possibly with Major James Milliken of “Monkey Hill” plantation (see map facing <abbr>p.</abbr> 120), an estate which is still known by that name. She cannot have been related to the “Young Millikin” mentioned on page 302, for the change of spelling indicates a different family. The reference to “a considerable fortune” of which she was deprived “by the folly of a mother” might furnish a clue to her identification, were it worth while to follow it up. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain Daniel Graham was a merchant and sea captain, whose vessel, the Spooner, a ship of 200 tons, 16 men, built in Boston, 1765, and registered in Glasgow, 1767, made semiannual trips between Basseterre and Glasgow, carrying sugar and cotton and bringing back general merchandise. The vessel was owned by Alexander Houston &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr> of Glasgow. Captain Graham had a store at the head of Liverpool Row, Basseterre, where he sold dry goods, oatmeal, “jereboams and magnums” of claret, iron hoops and rivets, sad irons, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher Gazette, March 2, 1776). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Governor to whom we had letters died the day we arrived. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Eustatius is a small rocky island, which Henry Laurens once called “that small speck in the ocean,” lying but eight miles northwest of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, in area somewhat less than seven square miles. It was at this time an open port, free to the commerce of all nations, and hence a flourishing centre of trade, legitimate and illegitimate. The governor who passed away on the day the party arrived was Jan de Windt, 1753⁠–⁠1775, who died on January 19 (Nouvelles Extraordinaires de Divers Endroits, commonly called Gazette de Leyde, 1775, no. 126, March 31, 1775, page 4). “On a appris aussi par les Lettres de <abbr>St.</abbr> Eustache en date du 20 Janvier, que <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jan de Windt, Commandant de cette Isle et des Isles adjacentes de Saba et <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin, y etoit mort la veille.” We are indebted to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> J. Franklin Jameson for this extract. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>West Digges, the actor, 1720⁠–⁠1786, paid frequent visits to Edinburgh, acting there as early as 1756, and Miss Schaw might well have seen him at any time after that date. She is probably referring to the same person on page 94, where she speaks of “Digges worshipping in the Temple of the Sun.” There is a brief account of his career in the Dictionary of National Biography. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Schaw and her party had now entered the Cape Fear River and were approaching the town of Brunswick, after a voyage of twenty-four days. When the captain pointed out Snow’s plantation, they must have been in the river channel, nearly opposite Fort Johnston, for the plantation lay about half way between Brunswick and the fort, on the northern side of Snow’s Creek, Sturgeon’s Point, the terminus of the road running north on that side of the river. It is shown on Jeffrey’s map in The American Atlas and on Collet’s map printed in 1770. Its owner is referred to in the following entry from the Brunswick records of date 1766. “As Robert Snow and his now wife find it impossible to live together with that harmony which the married state requires and have therefore for their mutual ease agreed to relax as far as they can that obligation which they cannot totally dissolve,” they enter into a formal indenture as to the division of the property (Brunswick County Records, Book A, Wills, Conveyances, and Inventories, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67, 69). Snow was a church warden of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip’s; hence a separation rather than a divorce. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fort, of which Miss Schaw speaks with so little respect, was Fort Johnston, eleven miles from the mouth of the river. It was built of “tapia,” consisting of equal parts of lime, raw oyster shells, sand, and water, forming a paste or “batter,” as the negroes called it, which was poured into boxes, much as liquid concrete or cement is poured today. The fort was constructed in 1740 and rebuilt in 1764, with a wall of tapia and a lower battery and fosse (North Carolina Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 1028, 1099, 1183). Governor Tryon, in commenting on its condition in 1766, said: “The proportions observed in the construction are as miserable as are the materials with which it is built. There is so great a proportion of sand that every gun fired brings down some of the parapet. I think the fort a disgrace to the ordnance his Majesty has placed in it” (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, 246). Compare Dobbs’s statements, 1754 (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 158), 1756 (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 595), 1761 (“Answers to Queries,” ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 614⁠–⁠615). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reference here is not to the governor of the province but to the governor of the fort, at this time Captain John Collet. Captain Seater on passing the fort would have to pay five shillings, a perquisite that went to the officer in command, “for giving the masters of vessels their product bill” (North Carolina Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, 249). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Cruizer. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Evidently the lieutenant from the Cruizer was on the hunt for deserters or else was engaged in impressing men for the royal navy. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He had deserted from the Sloop. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the last mention of Alexander’s Indian servant, Robert. Where he was from this time until Alexander sailed for England in July we do not know. Probably he returned to England with his master. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Except for the ruins of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip’s Church and a few disinterred fragments, the town of Brunswick has today entirely disappeared and the site is included within the boundaries of Orton plantation. See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> is printed Alexander Schaw’s description of North Carolina, written in London and dated the October after his arrival in 1775. It supplements his sister’s account written in quite a different vein. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One of the most agreeable incidents connected with the editing of Miss Schaw’s journal has been the discovery of the exact entries of the arrival of the Jamaica Packet and the Rebecca, in an old Brunswick customs book of entrances and clearances kept by William Dry, the collector. This book, containing the entrances from 1773 to July, 1775, and the clearances from 1763 to 1775, was discovered by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Sprunt of Wilmington, “in the ruins of a house, said to have been the residence of Nathaniel Rice,” and is now in his possession. We are greatly indebted to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sprunt for the privilege of examining this sadly mutilated but invaluable manuscript. The entries are as follows:</p>
					<p>“January 31, 1775, Jamaica Packet, Thomas Smith Captain, Brig, 80 tons, no guns, 8 men, built in Mass. 1772, registered Kirkaldy, 22 <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 1774, George Parker owner, ballast from Antigua, [signed] Thos Smith.”</p>
					<p>“February 14, 1775, Rebecca, Hugh Seater, Brig, 50 tons, no guns, 6 men, built in Mass. 1764, registered Basseterre, 29 <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 1774, Richard Quince owner, ballast, from <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts.” This entry is not signed, but one later, of July 2, 1775, when the Rebecca returned from another voyage to <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts, bringing sugar and rum, is signed “Hugh Seater.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Carron stove was one made at the Carron Iron Works on the Carron River in Stirlingshire, Scotland. The works were started in 1760 and are described by the traveller Pennant, who visited them in 1769, as “the greatest of their kind in Europe,” employing 1200 men (Hume Brown, Surveys of Scottish History, <abbr>p.</abbr> 113). The name “Carronade” for a piece of ordnance comes from the same source. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richard Quince would naturally be Miss Schaw’s first host, as he was the owner of the Rebecca, the vessel upon which she had just arrived. For his biography, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For William Dry, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Miss Schaw’s brother Robert, see page 21, note, and for additional details, Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the career of James Murray, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Schaw, according to the chronology of the narrative, remained at Brunswick from February 14 to March 17, and it is therefore strange that she should have given us no account of her life there. Possibly portions of the narrative have been lost. All we know of the month’s experience is that during that time Miss Schaw was without a “dish of tea,” a fact that may have political significance in view of the anti-British attitude of the provincial group which lived at Brunswick. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Joseph Eagles, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Schawfield” or “Sauchie,” as it was sometimes .called by its owner, Robert Schaw, Miss Schaw’s elder brother, was situated on the southwestern side of the Northwest branch, but a few miles above Wilmington. The northern part of the plantation was bought of James Moore and Ann his wife in 1772 and covered an area of 500 acres. The following is a description of that part of the property: “Beginning at the mouth of Indian Creek running up the river to the lower line of a tract or parcel of land, containing 500 acres, conveyed by deed to George Moore, <abbr>Sr.</abbr> by Maurice Moore, <abbr>Jr.</abbr> by Maurice Moore dec’d, thence west 400 poles thence south 80 poles to Indian Creek to the first station.” The plantation also contained another tract of 400 acres, purchased by Robert Schaw of Benjamin Stone, shipwright, June 19, 1?73&gt; “beginning at a stake at an elbow on the old northwest road leading from <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Misery ferry, running along the lower side of said road south 15 degrees west 14 poles, thence along the said road 88 degrees west 120 poles, thence north 65 degrees west to back or westernmost line of the aforesaid lands, thence along the said line north to Indian Creek, then down the various courses of said creek to the mouth, then down the NW River to the first station” (Brunswick County Records, Conveyances, B, 300). Thus Indian Creek, the first creek above <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Misery on the other side of the river, ran through the middle of the plantation, which lay between the old northwest road and the river. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to clause eight of the Continental Association, adopted by the Continental Congress, October 20, 1774, all “expensive diversions and entertainments” were discountenanced and discouraged (Journals of Congress, I, 78). Acting upon this recommendation, the Wilmington Committee of Safety, on January 28, 1775, resolved “that Balls and Dancing at Public Houses are contrary to the Resolves of the General Congress” (North Carolina Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 1118), and on March l warned a <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Austin of the town to withdraw the plans made for a ball at her house (ib., 1136). A few days later the same committee issued a general warning, declaring as its opinion “that all persons concerned in any dances for the future should be properly stigmatised” (ib., 1150). The ball to which Miss Schaw refers was to be given after this last warning, perhaps by some arrangement with the Committee of Safety. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There was an Alligator Creek on Eagles Island, but apparently Miss Schaw’s alligator hunt was in the Northwest branch of the Cape Fear. Hugh Meredith, in his account of the Cape Fear section, contributed to the Pennsylvania Gazette, May 6⁠–⁠13, 1731, says, “Alligators are very numerous here, but not very mischievous; however, on their account swimming is less practos’d here than in the northern provinces.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“As far as cattle and stock are concerned, it is purely their care to see to it how they get through the winter; with horses it is no better. If they survive it, they survive it. Hay they have none for there are no meadows and corn fodder and tops do not go far. Thus in winter the people have no milk at all, and when spring comes the cows are so nearly starved out as to be of little benefit till harvest. This may be the reason that their horses are not much larger than English colts, and their cows the size of their yearlings” (Diary of Bishop Spangenburg, 1752, North Carolina Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 2). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Wilmington, see accompanying plan and the description in Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Schaw may refer here to the Edenton tea party of October 25, 1774, but more probably she has in mind some Wilmington tea party of which, as far as we know, no record exists. At Edenton the tea was not “burnt;” and as at Wilmington the proceedings at this time far exceeded in violence those in the quiet Albermarle section, it is quite likely that Miss Schaw is recording a fact that has hitherto escaped observation. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is, Scots Irish. “British” is evidently intended to include “Scottish,” as Scotland at this time was called North Britain. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As early as 1736 there was a physician, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Roger Rolfe, in New Liverpool, as Wilmington was then called. Two others, <abbr>Drs.</abbr> Mortimer and Green, died in 1772. At the time of Miss Schaw’s visit <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Tucker were those whose names are most frequently met with. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Thomas Cobham, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The most important feature of the Continental Association was a nonimportation agreement, to go into force (by an extension of time from December l, 1774) on February <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1775. The Association was not formally adopted in North Carolina until April 5, 1775 (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 1180⁠–⁠1181), so that Miss Schaw must have written her account a few days before that date. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Governor Josiah Martin, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, “The Martin Family.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “old lady” whom Miss Schaw describes as “not of the best character or most amiable manners” was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jean Corbin, who married, first, Colonel James Innes, of Braddock’s campaign (died 1759), and second, in 1761, Francis Corbin, Lord Granville’s agent in North Carolina (Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>). She made her will on February 10, 1775, and died probably toward the end of the next month. The will was probated on April 3 and the inventory completed on the thirteenth. Of her history nothing else is known, neither who she was⁠—though “Jean” is manifestly a Scottish name⁠—nor when she was first married. For the bequest, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Evidently referring to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Schaw’s two youngest children, Alexander and Robert, sons of the second husband, Miss Schaw’s brother Robert (below, <abbr>p.</abbr> 160). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word “indolence,” here and elsewhere used by Miss Schaw, was frequently employed by critics of the southern colonies, who, accustomed as many of them were to the careful husbandry of the Old World, were often roused to indignant protest against the slipshod methods of agriculture in vogue in America and the idleness which was encouraged by an all too bounteous nature (<abbr>cf.</abbr> N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 314, 640; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 1040). We may not wonder that the impressions which Miss Schaw received of North Carolina were unfavorable or that she should have expressed her opinions so frankly. She was writing to a private correspondent and not for the press. She had come from Scotland, by way of Antigua and <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts, to a frontier country, which was still in large part a wilderness and where agriculture was still undeveloped. Her impressions were similar to those of many a New Englander who visited the Middle West in the early nineteenth century, or of those English men and women who made tours of the United States before 1840. In a more limited field she was a forerunner of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Trollope, whose Domestic Manners of the Americans pictures more elaborately, but with equal vigor, some of the cruder aspects of early American life. Unlike <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Trollope, however, she was influenced in her criticisms by a dislike of democracy and a profound distrust of radical activities. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Robert Schaw acquired “Schawfield” in 1772 and 1773. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though we have not been able to trace <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Robert Schaw’s connections with any degree of certainty, it is fairly clear that she was related, either nearly or remotely, to the “best people in the country,” as Miss Schaw says. Miss Schaw would not have used this phrase without ample knowledge of that whereof she wrote. If <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Schaw, who was Anne Vail before her marriage with her first husband, Job Howe (elder brother of Robert), belonged to the family of John and Jeremiah Vail of Perquimans and’Craven counties, she was related to the Swanns, Ashes, Lillingtons, Moseleys, Hasells, Porters, and Moores⁠—the “best people” in very truth, and engaged, most of them, as Miss Schaw says later, in the revolutionary movement.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Schaw died in 1788, leaving her property to her two sons, William Tryon Howe and Alexander Schaw, with a bequest of six negroes to Isabella Chapman, who, we suspect, was a daughter of Barbara Rutherfurd (John’s sister) and Alexander Chapman of Wilmington. The fact that she made bequests also to the daughters of Joseph Leech of New Bern, strengthens the belief that she was related to Jeremiah Vail, who was of the same town. In her will she names as one of her executors “John Rutherfurd” (Clerk’s Office, Wills, C, <abbr>p.</abbr> 396). If she means the father it is strange that she should not have known that he had died five years before. She may mean the son, who in 1787 would have been twenty-four years of age. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fence here mentioned is the “zigzag” or Virginian fence, found sometimes in southern New England, and frequently in the Middle West, where it is known as the “snake fence” or “log fence.” The rails, usually split, are laid zigzag fashion, one upon another, without posts, but generally with bracing of some sort at the angles. It is a slovenly affair; though easy to make and convenient for removing. Its height runs from three to five feet. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Had Miss Schaw visited the middle and northern colonies where the staples were similar to those of Mid Lothian, she would have found agricultural conditions more to her liking. Both manuring and grafting were known and their value understood in Pennsylvania, New York, and New England, and though farming devices and appliances were inevitably crude, they were not so far behind those of Scotland as were the contrivances of the plantation colonies. Probably Miss Schaw did not herself realize how comparatively recent were the improvements in agricultural methods employed by the East Lothian farmers, whom she so greatly admired. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Evidently John Rutherfurd is the man referred to (see below, <abbr>p.</abbr> 184). That Miss Schaw should occasionally indulge in exaggerations is not surprising. She is certainly wrong in her remarks about books in the province, just as she is wrong in saying, on page 194, that there were not five men of property in Wilmington who favored the revolutionary movement. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Robert Howe, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For James Moore, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He afterwards opposed Parker and Clinton and defeated the Loyalists. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Philip Miller, The Gardener’s Dictionary, 1731, eight editions. Of Miller the London Chronicle printed the following obituary notice. “Died, aged upward of 80, <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 18, 1771, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Philip Miller, F.R.S., gardener to the Apothecaries Company, at their physic-garden at Chelsea [founded by Sir Hans Sloane], to which office he succeeded his father about fifty years ago, but lately resigned on account of advanced age. He was allowed to be the best writer on gardening in this kingdom and was honoured with the acquaintance and correspondence of the connoisseurs of that science all over Europe and America. The universal good reception of his Dictionary and Calendar, the esteem in which they are still held, and the various editions they have passed through will be a lasting monument to his memory.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Alice Heron was the widow of Captain Benjamin Heron, one of the most active and influential men of the province. The name “Heron” was well known in Scotland and in England, where Captain Heron had a brother, Charles, an apothecary and surgeon at Corhampton in Hampshire. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Heron also had a sister, Peggy, in England. Captain Heron, as lieutenant in the royal navy, had taken part in the Cartagena expedition, and afterwards, as master of a sailing vessel, was accustomed to go back and forth between England and the colony. He served the government as deputy auditor, deputy secretary, and clerk of the pleas and of the crown, an office with extensive patronage and perquisites. He was also for some years a member of the council. He died in 1771.</p>
					<p>By his will he left to his wife the house and furniture in Wilmington, where were the offices named in the narrative; to his daughter, Mary, his plantation, “Mulberry,” on the Northwest; to his daughter, Elizabeth, his plantation “Mount Blake” or “Heron’s” on the Northeast; and to his son, Robert, lands on the Sound next to those of Job Howe. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Wilmington town and borough records show that fires were a source of much trouble and a cause of much legislation in the early history of the town and borough. As early as 1749 the possession of buckets and ladders was made compulsory and in 1751 it was ordered that any one whose chimney got on fire should pay a fine of twenty shillings. Chimneys were to be built at least three feet above the ridgepole. In the year 1756 a serious conflagration took place and consequently a water engine was ordered from England, hose was provided, and an engine house was built. This engine got out of repair, and in 1772 was deemed too small and a larger one was bought. When a fire was discovered the bell on the courthouse was rung to arouse the inhabitants. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin was buried at “the bottom of the lawn” on the “Point Pleasant” plantation, between her husbands, James Innes and Francis Corbin. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Point Pleasant” was the plantation of Colonel James Innes and was situated on the Northeast, on the south side, at the bend of the river. The location is shown on Wimble’s map of 1738 and was, as Miss Schaw says, on a peninsula jutting northward into the stream. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin had only a life interest in this plantation, which at her death was to go to support a free school at Wilmington. What she left to the children was as much of the Innes property⁠—lands, personal possessions, and negroes⁠—as was hers to dispose of according to the terms of her marriage settlement with Francis Corbin (Register’s Office, Conveyances, E, 89⁠–⁠94). These together with certain annuities due her under that settlement were to be cared for by “her good friend” John Rutherfurd for the maintenance and education of Fanny and the boys. The dwelling house and other buildings on the “Point Pleasant” plantation were destroyed by fire shortly before the year 1783 (North Carolina State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>, 512). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rutherfurd was a member of the council, not of the assembly proper. The session opened on April 4, the council meeting for the first time on April 6. Rutherfurd was present. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Rutherfurd’s connection with the quit-rents, see Bond, The QuitRent System in the American Colonies, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 305⁠–⁠308; and for a brief biography and estimate, Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. Martin wrote, July 29, 1774, to the Treasury, that he was convinced a much larger collection of this revenue could be made by a proper exertion on the part of the receiver-general, and said that the deficiency in the fund was due largely to Rutherfurd’s neglect. He said further that he had done all in his power to urge on that official and had in fact prevented formal complaint of his conduct from being laid before the board, not wishing to take advantage of his “extreme good nature” and “distressed circumstance” (Public Record Office, Treasury l: 505, fo. 317). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “unlawful convocation,” mentioned by Miss Schaw, was of course the Provincial Convention at New Bern, April 3, 1775. This convention consisted of the members of the assembly sitting as a convention, without authorization from the governor, and so without sanction of law. The same men, in the same quarters, sat the next day as a lawful assembly. See below, page 181. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This section is misplaced. Fruits were not ripe at this time. Miss Schaw could hardly have tested a watermelon between February and May, and certainly could not have found “grapes dangling over our heads in large bunches” before August or September. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Continental Association of 1774 contained a clause (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>) binding the colonists not to export or kill sheep “especially those of the most profitable kind.” It is likely that Rutherfurd accepted the terms, but equally probable that he did not adhere to them very strictly. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The huntsman and assistants were probably negroes. Both in North Carolina and South Carolina it was necessary for a negro to have a license or ticket to carry a gun. Therefore it was common for their masters to enter the names of such negroes as they wished to be licensed on the records of the county court and to offer security according to law. For instance, as early as 1740, Edward Moseley entered as “hunters on his sundry plantations” the names of four negroes. In 1764 Thomas Hallo way “prayed for a ticket for a negro man named Burgaw Billy to carry a gun at Burgaw Plantation,” and John Rutherfurd did the same for a negro named Mingo at Rocky Point, with his friend Benjamin Heron as security. After Rutherfurd acquired “Hunthill” he must have obtained a number of such licenses for his negroes. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The turkey buzzard is one of the varieties of the American vulture, differing structurally from the vultures of the Old World. It is not considered, however, a true vulture any more than are those of Europe. Nevertheless Miss Schaw was well up in her ornithology. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An infant has the same allowance with its parents as soon as born. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first of the two plantations to which Miss Schaw refers we have not been able to identify, but the second was “Hilton,” the home of Cornelius Harnett, one of the leaders of the revolutionary movement in North Carolina. It was situated but a short distance north of Wilmington. It was at “Hilton” that Josiah Quincy held conferences with Howe and Harnett in 1773) where “the plan of Continental correspondence [was] highly relished, much wished for, and resolved upon as proper to be pursued.” For a description, see North Carolina Booklet, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, no. 9, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71, and Connor, Cornelius Harnett, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 201⁠–⁠202. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The maiden name of Mary, wife of Cornelius Harnett, is unknown. Her identification as a Grainger is wrong. She lived at “Hilton” but died in New York City, April 19, 1792. Her will is still preserved (Wills, AB, 486⁠–⁠488). Miss Schaw’s later comment on Harnett as a “brute” may have only a political significance, but more probably it refers to his personality. If so the remark is not surprising, for despite Harnett’s great services to the cause of the Revolution, he was not a man of either delicacy or refinement. The fact that he had an illegitimate child must be judged according to the moral standards of that day: Robert Halton, Francis Nash, and Matthew Rowan each had the same, and no one seems to have thought less of them on that account. But both Harnett and Howe were men of a fibre less fine and sensitive than that of James Moore, for example, and Miss Schaw was easily impressed by such distinctions. George Hooper’s characterization of Harnett, drawn up many years later, though the tribute of one with loyalist antecedents and a Bostonian, is almost too flattering an estimate to be convincing. Certainly in Miss Schaw’s day Harnett was not “beloved and honored by the adherents of monarchy,” as Hooper says (Connor, Cornelius Harnett, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 202⁠–⁠203).</p>
					<p>Miss Schaw formed sudden likes and dislikes and acknowledges herself as prejudiced. This is shown in the case of the emigrants and of Neilson, both of whom, as she found, improved on acquaintance. Perhaps the same might have been true in the case of Harnett, Howe, and other American radicals, had she known them longer and under different circumstances. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To “run tick” was, and still is, to give credit. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harnett’s practice was unusual, for charge accounts or book debts were very common in colonial days, when small change was difficult to obtain. Inasmuch as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harnett was able to enforce her rule, coppers must have been more plentiful in 1775 than they were under Dobbs or Tryon. The former in 1755 wanted the British government to issue a copper coinage for North Carolina (<abbr class="initialism">TV</abbr>. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 155&gt; 324⁠–⁠325)&gt; and the latter in 1764 suggested that North Carolina’s share of the parliamentary appropriation be sent over either “in the copper coin of Britain or in such coin as his Majesty may be pleased to order to be coined in the Tower of London” (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 1219⁠–⁠1220). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Newbern town where the Congress meets. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The firm of Hogg &amp; Campbell was one of the leading mercantile and contracting houses in Wilmington, doing both a wholesale and a retail business. In the Cape Fear Mercury, December 29, 1773, we read, “For London, the ship Good Intent will be ready to sail; part freight secured, for remainder apply to Hogg and Campbell.” The firm was composed of Robert Hogg and Samuel Campbell, prominent men of known loyalist sympathies. That is why Miss Schaw felt that she could turn to them for such information and advice as she was not likely to obtain elsewhere. For biographical data concerning these men, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the arrival of Miss Schaw in the province, the boys were probably sent with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller to “Schawfield,” where they remained about two months. They were then put to board with a schoolmaster in Wilmington, where they were so unhappy that Miss Schaw took them away and carried them off to “Point Pleasant.” Very likely they remained there until the final departure from North Carolina. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was Archibald Neilson, who arrived at “Point Pleasant” about June <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> and remained there, off and on, until August 25. See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The situation at New Bern was unique and we may not wonder that it aroused Miss Schaw to wrathful comment. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Connor, in his Cornelius Harriett (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 83⁠–⁠84), has described the circumstances as follows. “It was, indeed, a pretty situation. One set of men composed two assemblies, one legal, sitting by authority of the royal governor and in obedience to his writ; the other illegal, sitting in defiance of his authority and in disobedience to his proclamation. The governor impotently called on the former to join him in dispersing the latter. The two assemblies met in the same hall and were presided over by the same man. ‘When the governor’s private secretary was announced at the door, in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moderator Harvey would become <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Speaker Harvey and gravely receive his Excellency’s message.’ ” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the case of Thomas Macknight, Loyalist through circumstance and against his will, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Archibald Neilson plays an important part in Miss Schaw’s narrative from this time on. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Patrick Brydone, A Tour Through Sicily and Malta, in a series of Letters to William Beckford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr> Two volumes, London, 1773. The account of the “Sirocc” or Southeast Wind is in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 104. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Writing from her plantation “Chinese Temple,” August 25, 1775, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> DeRosset says: “It is thought <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nelson’s suit at Point Pleasant will end in matrimony⁠—by his frequent stay there. For as Bevil (in Conscious Lover) says⁠—‘A denial is a favor every man may pretend to, and if a Lady would do honor to herself, she should never keep a gentlemen in suspense, if she knows she can’t like him.’</p>
					<p>“As Miss [Rutherfurd] appears to be a sweet, innocent young creature, I think she won’t seem to encourage what she disapproves, and she is too sensible to trifle away his time without approbation. In general people in love look mighty silly, but I do assure you <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nelson is more chatty and agreeable than ever⁠—even before his mistress. I should not wonder if Fanny loved him. Do you remember how you looked when you were in love? Nay, do not give such a sigh, or I will never speak to you again of the Ladies of Cedar Grove [the DeRosset plantation]: They are all well⁠—as much yours as ever, even little Fanny” (James Sprunt Historical Monographs, no. 4, page 23). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Rutherfurd had a plantation “Rowland” at Rocky Point, which he held until the sale of his properties in 1772. Sometime before Miss Schaw’s arrival he acquired in trust for his children a large group of nine tracts, 4084 acres, on the east side of the Northeast, between Holly Shelter Creek and New Exeter, thirty miles from Wilmington and ten from Rocky Point. Four of the pieces bore distinctive names, “Stony Rrook,” “Rear Garden,” “Price’s Neck,” and “Arthur’s Neck.” North of the plantation was Holly Shelter “pocosin,” a term that Rrickell defines as signifying wet and low lands “where large cypress trees grow.” We even find the phrase “pocosin swamp.” This pocosin may be the “vast piece of water” referred to by Miss Schaw.</p>
					<p>Rutherfurd’s fondness for his Scottish connections appears in the names which he gave to his plantations. The first he called “Rowland,” after his father’s estate in Scotland, which had some years before passed into the hands of the Pringles; and the other “Hunthill,” the name of the estate of his Scottish relative, Henry Rutherfurd, which lay on the right bank of the Jed, extending north to the neighborhood of Jedburgh. His New York cousin, Walter Rutherfurd, showed the same liking, for he named his summer home in New Jersey near Roiling Spring (now Rutherford) after the family estate in Scotland, “Edgerston Manor” (Supplementary Notes to Rutherfurds of that Ilk and their Cadets, printed but not published, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26⁠–⁠36). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The following extract from the county court records of Brunswick (1737-1741), page 81) illustrates the raft system. “Large rafts of lumber are frequently brought down the river and by stress of weather are broke and lyable to be lost. Persons picking up the scattered lumber, boats or goods are to advertise the same in public places.” The Scottish “dales” are the English “deals,” that is, sawn boards or planks. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lands or plantations “down on the sound” were those along the western side of the shallow waters enclosed by the sand bars and islands of the Atlantic coast. Many planters, Heron, Howe, Hasell, Grainger, Mason, Hooper, Harnett, Lillington, Maclaine, Gabriel Johnston, and Porter, had lands or plantations there and resided on them for all or a part of the summer season. The waters, extending for miles along the coast, “not being freshened by rivers and constantly receiving the tide from the sea,” were later experimented with as affording “a good surface” for evaporating salt. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The journal was resumed sometime after May 24. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Governor Martin escaped from New Bern on May 24 and by June 2 had taken up his residence at Fort Johnston. Before leaving he despatched his wife and children in a small vessel to New York, where they found refuge with his father-in-law at “Rockhall,” Long Island. Later, in 1776, one James Green carried his furniture and baggage in a sailing vessel to the Cape Fear, but arrived after he had left and consequently the property was seized by the Americans.</p>
					<p>Martin remained at Fort Johnston until its destruction and then took up his residence on the ships of war, going to Charles Town in May, 1776. In July he left the Peggy, upon which he had been living in Charles Town harbor, and went to New York, arriving there August l, but for a month was unable to join his family, only twenty miles away, on account of the manoeuvres preliminary to the battle of Long Island. With that battle won by the British (August 27, 1776) the way was made clear and he probably went at once to “Rockhall.” His daughter Augusta was born there on September 5. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There were three attempts made to capture Governor Martin: one at New Bern, one at Fort Johnston, and one on the Peggy in Charles Town harbor. Probably that to which Miss Schaw refers was the attempt at Fort Johnston, which resulted in the seizure and destruction of the fort, but not in the capture of the governor. Robert Howe was the instigator of this attempt, and was also concerned in the project to take Martin at Charles Town, the following spring, in order to prevent him from bringing Cornwallis upon the colony. The Americans believed that Martin, while at Charles Town, was endeavoring to persuade Cornwallis to attempt the invasion of the colony by way of the southern coast, with the idea of joining the Highlanders in an attack upon Wilmington. See the letters from Howe to Charles Lee, “Lee Letters,” Collections, New York Historical Society, 1871, I, 398, 401. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> N. C.R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 43. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Murray wrote in 1777, “Billy and Sam Campbell and Bob Schaw will be obliged to leave Carolina for not taking the oaths to the states, and so must several Scotch for the like crime” (Letters, <abbr>p.</abbr> 266). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In taking the longer and more roundabout route by water from “Schawfield” to “Point Pleasant,” Miss Schaw would have to pass Wilmington. Apparently this is what she means by her remark. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though no specific reference is elsewhere made to this review, which so excited Miss Schaw’s derision, it was probably connected with the drilling of the militia in the spring and summer of 1775, under the direction of Robert Howe, against which Martin so vigorously protested (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 11575 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 149⁠–⁠150). This particular review took place early in June. We know of no troops sent to South Carolina at this early date, although recruiting officers from that colony came to North Carolina about this time. Martin, writing on June 30 and speaking of these recruiting parties, said that he hoped they would be “disappointed in their expectation of great succour from hence” (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 48). Miss Schaw may have been mistaken in saying that “a little army” had been sent to South Carolina, but as she was on the spot and wrote down what she heard at the time, her statement cannot be rejected as impossible. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On March 6, 1775, the Wilmington Committee of Safety formally accepted the Continental Association and voted that all its members should go in a body and wait upon the housekeepers in town, requesting their signatures to the same or receiving from them their reasons for refusing to sign, in order “that such enemies of their country may be set forth to public view and treated with the contempt they merit.” Nine merchants and planters and two tailors (among the nine was <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham) at first refused to sign (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 1166) and were placed under a boycott, but later, another opportunity being given, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham took advantage of it.</p>
					<p>John Ashe, who had declined a reappointment as colonel of militia under Martin, took command of a body of some four or five hundred men and appearing in Wilmington threatened “the people above mentioned with military execution, if they did not immediately sign the Association dictated by the committee, and being interrogated for his authority pointed to the men he had assembled.” “His cowardly intimidations of these individuals (writes Martin) so far answered the purpose that they were obliged to sign what their consciences revolted at and abhorred.” In another letter Martin adds, “The Scotch merchants at Wilmington who so long maintained their loyalty have lately (August, 1775) been compelled ostensibly to join in sedition by appearing under arms at the musters appointed by the committees, although they are still at heart as well affected as ever” (ib., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 48, 170⁠–⁠171, 236). In the Cape Fear Mercury of August 25, 1775, among the items is this: “<abbr>Lt.</abbr> <abbr>Col.</abbr> Cotton &amp; Saml and Jacob Williams stopped, having been eight days on board the Cruizer with <abbr>Gov.</abbr> Martin. They signed the association.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “ambassadors from the back settlements” were of course Highlanders, one of whom was Captain Alexander McLeod, late an officer of marines, who had been in the colony about a year. With whom he was closeted in Wilmington we are not informed, but eventually he made his way down the river and had an interview with the governor (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 326). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This section is surely misplaced. Cotton cannot have been ripe in the first week of July. It may have been in flower, but not in boll before the latter part of September. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The plan was to go to “Point Pleasant” by land instead of by water, taking the road out of Wilmington that led north toward Heron’s bridge and from that point along the west side of the river on into Virginia. This road, known as the Duplin road, was the main thoroughfare into the upcountry in the direction of Hillsboro and the Dan. It seems to have been possible to go to New Bern also by this route, turning just below Holly Shelter Creek, at New Exeter (a town that never grew up), and eventually joining the regular New Bern road. Craig’s army, after taking Wilmington in 1781, marched on New Bern and returned to Wilmington by this route, stopping at Rutherfurd’s plantation for four days on the way.</p>
					<p>But Miss Schaw would not go as far as Heron’s bridge. Passing behind “Hilton,” she would turn off a short distance beyond the “Hermitage” and “Castle Haynes” and ride four miles west through the woods to “Point Pleasant,” which lay on the south bank, at the bend of the river. Even in 1801 the road out of Wilmington up the Northeast branch “was narrow and led through a pine forest.” “We thought we were in a lane,” writes Caroline Burgwin, who had just come from England to take charge of the “Hermitage,” her father’s home, “and expressed to our astonished driver our fears of an attack by wild beasts” (Burr, The Hermitage, 1885). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On July 5, Governor Martin wrote to Lord Dartmouth, “I have engaged <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alexr Schaw, whom I have the honour to introduce to your Lordship, to charge himself with this letter. This gentleman is qualified by his intelligence, his candour, and his accurate observation, during some months that he has resided in this colony, to give your Lordship every information that you can desire relative to its present condition and circumstances. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schaw is an officer in the customs in the <abbr>Is.</abbr> of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher’s, from which he has been absent by leave on his private concerns, and was preparing to return to it, when <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Tollemache’s arrival presented me with so fair an occasion to employ him advantageously for his Majesty’s service that I could not resist it” (Public Record Office, C. O. 5:318).</p>
					<p>Schaw sailed with Captain Tollemache on the Scorpion, July 6 or 7. The Scorpion had left Charles Town shortly before for Boston, touching at the Cape Fear to deliver despatches from Gage to Martin and to receive anything that Martin might wish to send. Schaw transshipped at Boston to another vessel for England, arriving there sometime in September or October. He had not reached London by September 15, but was there on October 31. His letters to Dartmouth are dated October 31 and November 8. For his expenses Governor Martin advanced him £100, which sum was afterwards included in Martin’s statement of account with the British government (Public Record Office, Declared Accounts, 1259, 139). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Schaw was appointed searcher of customs at Basseterre, <abbr>St.</abbr> Kitts, March 31, 1774. When there in January, 1775, he obtained leave of absence for twelve months from March 6, but never went back. That he intended, when he left North Carolina, to return to <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher from England, and that his friends expected him to do so, when he parted from them in July, appears from the act of his brother Robert, who six months later, on December 10, 1775, transferred to “Alexr Schaw, Senior, of the Island of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>” a certain negro woman named Lucy, for the “maintenance and education” of his own son, Alexander Schaw, Jr. (Brunswick County Records, Conveyances, B, 299). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By “King’s proclamation,” Miss Schaw means the proclamation issued by Governor Gage of Massachusetts, Boston, June 12, 1775, as a broadside, offering “His most gracious Majesty’s pardon to all persons who shall forthwith lay down their arms and return to the duties of peaceable subjects, excepting only from the benefits of such pardon, Samuel Adams and John Hancock,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> It corresponds to a similar pardon issued by Clinton offering amnesty to all in North Carolina, except Harnett and Howe. Martin calls Gage’s proclamation “a proclamation of the King” and it was generally so interpreted. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was believed in the province that Martin had planned to arm the negroes and to proclaim the freedom of such of them as would join the King’s standard. John Stuart, in his letter to Dartmouth, of July 21, 1775, mentions a report which had spread through the Carolinas that the negroes were immediately to be set free by the government and that arms were to be given them to fall upon their masters. In consequence of these rumors, the Wilmington Committee ordered that all negroes be disarmed. During June and July the conditions which Miss Schaw describes characterized the life of the town (AT. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 43, 94⁠–⁠95, 112, 118). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cobham was probably a native of the province. Her first husband was John Paine of Brunswick county and she was married to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cobham sometime in the late sixties. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As far as we know Heron’s bridge was the only drawbridge in the colonies. There had been a ferry at that point over the Northeast until 1766, when Captain Heron, who owned land there on both sides of the river, was authorized by act of assembly to build a bridge. This bridge was to “have one wide arch of thirty feet for rafts and pettiauguas to pass through and six feet above high-water mark, and be made to draw up occasionally for the navigation of vessels of larger burden.” The ferry was abolished and Heron was authorized to erect a gate and take tolls (N. C. State Records, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>, 506⁠–⁠507). Miss Schaw’s description of this bridge is interesting. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fort was attacked and burned July 19, 1775. Governor Martin’s account of this event can be read in his letter to Dartmouth, of July 20; that of the Wilmington Committee in their resolution of July 21 (JV. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 107⁠–⁠109, 113⁠–⁠115. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> 140). The two versions show how hopeless was any prospect of a reconciliation between the contending parties at this time. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Captain Collet, see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The gentleman referred to was Robert Hogg, who left Wilmington in July (see Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>). One of those who had been ordered out “on this duty of burning the fort” was his partner, Samuel Campbell, whose statement before the Loyalist Claims Commission confirms what Miss Schaw says here (see below, <abbr>p.</abbr> 324). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Martin issued four proclamations in 1775: one on March <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, from New Bern; a second on April 3, also from New Bern; a third on June 16, from Fort Johnston; and a fourth on August 8, from on board the Cruizer, the “fiery” proclamation ordered by the Wilmington Committee to be burned by the hangman. The last is the one to which Miss Schaw refers. It used to be said in Scotland, in the days of religious controversy, that when a treatise was difficult to answer the most convenient method was to have it burned by the common hangman. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Newmarket is a town in central England, on the border line between Cambridgeshire and Suffolk, long famous for its horse racing. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The incident narrated by Miss Schaw illustrates admirably Martin’s remark in his letter of August 28. “The same ill fortune has attended my latest attempt to counteract the design of a Convention at this time assembled at Hillsborough, by a Proclamation of which your Lordship will receive a copy forthwith, the messengers employed to circulate it in the country having been all intercepted, which I the more lament as I think it might have produced good effects upon the minds of the people, and that I have much reason to apprehend the difficulty of communication which becomes daily greater and greater, will totally cut me off from all intercourse with the interior parts of it hereafter until I am able by force to lay it open” (N. C. R. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 231⁠–⁠232). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “great road” was that already noted from Wilmington up the Northeast and on to Virginia, via Heron’s bridge. “Point Pleasant” was west from the road, four miles toward the river. The plantation referred to in the text was probably “Rose Hill,” the owner of which, Parker Quince, son of Richard Quince, was living there at the time and must have been the gentleman who, according to Miss Schaw, did not take kindly to these midnight raids. In his will (1785) Quince left “Rose Hill” to his son. He died in England and was buried in Ramsgate, the home of his fathers. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major John Pitcairn, who was killed at Bunker Hill, married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Dalrymple of Annfield (or Annefield) in Dumfriesshire (Anderson, Scottish Nation, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, 291). So Miss Schaw’s worst fears were realized. A petition from the widow, Elizabeth Pitcairn, is in Adm. l. 486. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was in September or October that Miss Schaw, Fanny and the boys, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller took refuge on board the Cruizer. All apparently crossed the ocean together, but as there is no mention of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller and the boys in the account of the Lisbon sojourn, it is probable that they remained on the George, which seems to have been chartered for the use of the party and so to have waited in Portuguese waters until the Lisbon visit was over. That the boys went back to Scotland with Miss Schaw and the others is pretty clearly proved by the remark on page 253; and if they did so <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller must have gone back with them. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Under date October 22, the master’s log of the Cruizer says, “Came in the ship George belonging to Glasgow with passengers.” The captain’s log reads “with emigrants from Scotland,” and Will Cruden in his letter to Dartmouth speaks of the George as returning to Glasgow “after landing emigrants from Scotland” (<abbr>Feb.</abbr> 20, 1776, Dartmouth Papers). There is no other reference to this particular company of emigrants, but doubtless they were Scottish Highlanders, of the same class as those already described by Miss Schaw. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Schaw seems easily to confuse council and assembly. Of a council meeting at this time (about October 8 or 10) there is no trace. If held it could have left no official record, as there would not have been a quorum, since Rutherfurd was the only one present besides the governor. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Queensferry is a small seaport on the Firth of Forth, eight miles west of Edinburgh. South Queensferry is in Linlithgowshire and North Queensferry in Fifeshire. A ferry at that time and until 1890 connected the two places. The distance is a mile and a half, covered now by the famous Forth bridge. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The paper money which Miss Schaw had was probably the old legal tender of North Carolina, still in circulation, as no bills of credit had been issued since 1761. Its exchange value with sterling at this time was in the ratio of 181⁠–⁠177 to 100, so that a pound currency would buy only a little more than half as much as a pound sterling. As a rule colonial bills circulated but little outside the colony which issued them. In going to Lisbon Miss Schaw would need either bills of exchange or hard money. There was no time to get the former and the latter she secured with difficulty. What she finally did obtain were Spanish silver dollars and Portuguese gold Johannes, that is, “dollars and Joes.” The Spanish dollar was worth four shillings and six pence sterling, the double Jo., seventy-two shillings, the single Jo., thirty-six shillings, and the half Jo., eighteen shillings sterling. The <abbr>Jo.</abbr> and half <abbr>Jo.</abbr> were among the commonest of the gold coins in actual use among the continental colonists. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The George, Captain Deans, sailed for Glasgow, via Lisbon, on November 10, 1775, as recorded in the log of the Cruizer. The only contemporary reference to Miss Schaw’s departure is contained in a letter from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> DeRosset to John Burgwin. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tom Hooper,” she writes, “went to Scotland in a vessel with Miss Shaw and Miss Rutherfurd, on the way to England” (James Sprunt Historical Monographs, no. 4, <abbr>p.</abbr> 28). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably “December 4th” should be December 12. According to Miss Schaw’s statement, the voyage lasted thirty-two days (“a month and some days,” she says elsewhere), which, reckoned from November 10, the date of sailing, would bring the arrival at <abbr>St.</abbr> Tubes to December 11 or 12. As the party remained at <abbr>St.</abbr> Tubes only a few days and reached Lisbon on the igth, it may be that the date of arrival should be put as late as the 14th. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A lazaretto was usually a pesthouse for smallpox and other contagious diseases, but here is used for quarantine. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Neilson had been appointed naval officer by Governor Martin only a month or so before. It is curious that he should have had the seal of his office in his trunk. Were the seals deemed, as were the papers, the private property of the incumbent? It is more likely, however, that his possession of the seal was something of an accident, since he had never actually entered upon the duties of the office. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The name of the seaport is Setubal, called by the French <abbr>St.</abbr> Ives and by the British <abbr>St.</abbr> Tubes or <abbr>St.</abbr> Ubes. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The description of Maritornes in Don Quixote (ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>) reads as follows: “An Asturian wench, broad faced, flat-headed, with a little nose, one eye squinting and the other not much better. It is true, the elegance of her form made amends for other defects. She was not seven hands high; and her shoulders, which burdened her a little too much, made her look down to the ground more than she would willingly have done.” Hogarth gives us a picture of Maritornes in one of his scenes illustrating Don Quixote. Miss Schaw may have seen this print. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The great earthquake occurred on November <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1755, just twenty years before Miss Schaw’s arrival. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Duke of Aveiro (Joseph Mascarenhas), 1708⁠–⁠1759, with the marquess and marchioness of Tavora, their two sons, and four or five others, were executed in 1759 for an attempt on the life of King Joseph I, September 3, 1758. The duke and the marquess were broken on the wheel, their bodies consumed by fire, and their ashes thrown into the sea; the marchioness was decapitated, the ducal palace pulled down, and the family and even the name of Tavora obliterated as far as possible. The cruelty of the sentences and the torture which accompanied the execution of the principal conspirators, as well as the “grand affair” itself, made a great stir at the time and the details must have been well known to Miss Schaw. No one who has ever read the contemporary accounts of the scene at the scaffold at Belem, as printed, for example, in the Universal Magazine, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>, 96⁠–⁠99, which Miss Schaw might well have seen, can ever forget the harrowing details of the spectacle. There were two palaces, one at Setubal and the other at Lisbon. From Miss Schaw’s account neither would seem to have been entirely destroyed. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A recent historian of Portugal says of the plot, “Whatever the real origin of this plot may have been, it resulted in the king being waylaid and wounded, and in the execution of some of the most prominent nobles of Portugal. It seems not impossible, in view of the repetition of the incident ten months later that Pombal [see page 236, note] by these ‘popish plots’ was killing his two birds with one stone, so as to strengthen his influence with the king by disgracing the great nobles who were jealous of his power and by discrediting the Jesuits, whose reputation and record would certainly render them responsible. In 1759 the Society’s estates were confiscated and its members expelled” (Portugal, An Historical Study, by George Young, page 195). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mounterrara caps, Spanish montera, were hunting caps made of cloth, which, though originally used by mountaineers, came to be the common headgear of the peasant people of Spain. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To take all the liberties of a British wife meant a good deal in Portugal, where at this time the wives of the better classes rarely left their homes to appear in public places or to share in the social life of the men. Pombal tried to relieve women somewhat of their ennui, due (as was commonly said) to masculine jealousy, but even he failed in his main object and was obliged to contrive pleasures that could be enjoyed by the women alone among themselves. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The scene referred to is in Don Quixote, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In going from Setubal to Lisbon, the party would have to ride over the Sierra da Arabida and sail across the Tagus. Southey has described the reverse journey, from Lisbon to Setubal, in terms which may well be compared with those of Miss Schaw. He crossed the Tagus to Moita, rode thence on mules (at a “cruzado novo” apiece) up the hill of Palmella, through the pines, with flowers scattered on every hand amid the heather and sand, and found at the entrance to Palmella a fountain “with the arms of the town and an inscription, in which (he says) I was sometime amused at seeing S. P. Q. P., by the idea of the Senate and People of Palmella.” He then descended on the other side of the sierra with a prospect before him “the most beautiful I ever beheld” and entered Setubal, which he describes at some length (Letters written during a Short Residence in Spain and Portugal, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32032<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joseph I, 1750⁠–⁠1777, son of John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, married Maria Anna, daughter of Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> of Spain. His daughter, the princess of Brazil, married his youngest brother, her uncle Peter. After Joseph’s death in 1777, she and her husband reigned as Maria I and Peter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, he until his death in 1786, she after that, alone, until her death in 1816, when she was succeeded by her son John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, the great-great-grandfather of the late Carlos I. See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> 251.</p>
					<p>Sebastian Joseph de Carvalho e Mello, Marquess of Pombal, was the greatest statesman that Portugal ever produced. Not only did he rebuild Lisbon after the earthquake but he endeavored also to win independence for Portugal from the political dominance of Spain, the commercial dominance of Great Britain, and the religious dominance of the Inquisition and the Jesuits. (The most accessible life of Pombal is by J. Smith, Count of Carnota, Memoirs of the Marquess of Pombal, 1843, but though a scholarly work it stands in great need of revision.) <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This adventure happened at Moita, which though located today some distance from navigable water, was then the place of departure on the southern shore of the Tagus for those wishing to go to Lisbon. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Southey returned to Lisbon and in crossing the Tagus from Moita had much the same experience as had Miss Schaw. He made the trip in a boat “used for carrying dung,” the moisture of which “oozed through upon us.” “Half a dozen ducks, who made part of the passengers, amused us (he writes) with their music, and the men stunk so abominably that even Manuel complained. We preferred being wet to this pestilential atmosphere and reached Lisbon after a passage of five hours” (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 331⁠–⁠332). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The General Maclean mentioned by Miss Schaw as “governor of Lisbon,” was Francis Maclean of the Macleans of Blaich, who was a lieutenant in the army of Cumberland at the siege of Bergen-op-Zoom in 1747, served with Wolfe at Quebec in 1759, and accompanied the expedition against Belleisle in 1761. His extraordinary position in Lisbon was due to the fact that when in 1762 France and Spain combined against Portugal, England offered her assistance and sent Maclean to organize the military defences of the country. He was appointed in 1762 governor of Almeida and later, as major-general, governor of the province of Estremadura and the city of Lisbon, serving in that capacity until 1778. On his departure he was presented by Peter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> with a sword and by his consort Maria I with a ring. During the next two years he was with the army in America as brigadier-general. He died in 1781 (Historical and Genealogical Account of the Clan Maclean, 1838, <abbr>p.</abbr> 293). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “Major Scott” mentioned here was John Scott of Mallony, who in 1742 married Susan, granddaughter of the Marquess of Tweeddale. Their eldest son, Thomas, served with distinction in America, Holland, and India. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Major Lindsay” was probably Major Martin Eccles Lindsay, son of Henry of Wormiston, though the identification is not certain. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir John Hort was the second son of Josiah Hort, archbishop of Tuam, and married Elizabeth, daughter of the Honorable William Fitzmaurice, brother of the 20th Lord Kerry. He was appointed British consul-general at Lisbon in 1767, was created a baronet in the year, and died October 23, 1807. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The royal palace at Cintra, some sixteen or seventeen miles away. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Robert Walpole was the son of Horatio Walpole, diplomat and auditor-general of the plantation revenues, nephew of Sir Robert Walpole, and cousin of Horace, the wit and letter writer. He served as clerk of the Privy Council in extraordinary, 1748⁠–⁠1764, in ordinary, 1764⁠–⁠1768, on diplomatic business in France, 1768⁠–⁠1770, and as envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to Portugal, 1771⁠–⁠1800. He married at Lisbon, May 10, 1785, Miss Stert, daughter of Richard Stert, a merchant there, and died in 1809. His relative Thomas, son of Horace, was a member of the Ohio Land Company in 1773 and one of the Vandalia petitioners in 1774. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If the reference in the text be to Miss Schaw’s grandmother on her father’s side, her first name was Anna. She is mentioned as living at Lauriston in 1726 and must have survived until after the earthquake in 1755. It would be interesting to know more about this old lady, who, in characteristic Scottish Presbyterian fashion, “was not sorry for any misfortune that befel a Papist.” <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Belem was a suburb of Lisbon, extending three or four miles southwest along the Tagus, from a mile and a half to five miles distant. It is sometimes called the Westminster of Portugal, because containing two royal palaces and a royal monastery founded in 1490. One must distinguish between the palace d’Ajuda and the Belem palace (the Pago de Belem), sometimes called the Botanical Palace. The former was not built at this time, so that it was the latter which Miss Schaw visited. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Duchess of Atholl (second wife of James, 2nd Duke of Atholl) was Jean, daughter of John Drummond of Meginck, Perthshire. Colin Drummond was her brother. It is odd that Miss Schaw should speak of her as the “Dutchess of Athole,” because on September 2, 1767, she was married to Lord Adam Gordon, of the 66th Regiment of Foot, who had just returned from a long tour through the American colonies (journal printed in Mereness, Travels in the American Colonies}. Her first husband died in 1764. As she had first married in May, 1749 (Universal Magazine, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, 239), she must have been about forty-five in 1775. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For many years Englishmen and Scotsmen had made Portugal a British winter resort. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George writing of the eighteenth century says, “The new trade in tourists was just beginning with those whose health made a winter in England a worse hardship than crossing the seas; and Fielding’s account of his journey to Portugal as a luxurious invalid late in the eighteenth century, shows what hardship then meant. The moist mild climate of Lisbon was considered suitable for consumptives by the science of the day, and all who could afford or survive the journey went with Fielding to fill the British cemetery at Lisbon” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 185).</p>
					<p>The land for a cemetery was ceded to England in 1655, in accordance with the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> article of the treaty of 1654 (“and finally, that a place be allotted them fit for the burial of their dead”). The most famous persons who lie buried there are Henry Fielding and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Philip Doddridge, but scores of others also found in the British cemetery their final resting place. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To understand the reference to the “factory” and the presence of so many English and Scottish merchants in Lisbon, one must remember that since the treaties of 1642 and 1654, the marriage treaty of 1661, which confirmed the earlier arrangements, and the famous Methuen treaty of 1703, Portuguese commerce had come practically under British control. British merchants established themselves in Oporto and Lisbon, receiving and selling imported merchandise to the Portuguese, either for home consumption or for export to Brazil, and for this purpose erected buildings which were used as warehouses and agencies, for the storing and selling of goods. In a sense Portugal became in the eighteenth century Great Britain’s commercial vassal, and the Portuguese merchants rarely rose above the level of shopkeepers and retail traders. It was this condition of commercial subordination that Pombal wished to alter by restoring trade to the natives and making them importers and wholesale dealers in foreign goods. He was unsuccessful in his effort.</p>
					<p>The terms “factor” and “factory” were used as the equivalent of “agent” and “agency.” Evidently the buildings served not only as commission houses and places for storage, but as residences also and centres for entertainment. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque was erected by the Jesuits in 1561. It is “exteriorly a building of the meanest architectural pretensions,” but contains a beautiful chapel, that of <abbr>St.</abbr> John the Baptist, constructed of costly marbles, jasper, and lapis lazuli. Apparently Miss Schaw and Fanny were so taken up with the altar and the wardrobe that they did not see this work of art, the usual object of interest to visitors. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir William Chambers, A Dissertation on Oriental Gardening, 1772. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>His description of an Asiatick garden. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 7, 1777. “Died at Edinburgh, <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Helen Nicholas Murray, daughter of the deceased David, Viscount of Stormont, aunt of the present Viscount of Stormont, and sister of the Earl of Mansfield” (Scots Magazine, 1777, page 627). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Southey visited the same gardens and his account of conditions twenty years later supplements admirably that of Miss Schaw. The collection of birds he considers “the richest I ever saw,” but the menagerie was “ill managed and ill supplied.” “I was almost sickened,” he writes, “at the pestilential filth in which the beasts are confined. The fine old elephant of John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> was put upon a short allowance of cabbages, but as those who diminished his food could not lessen his appetite, the poor animal died. There are only three zebras remaining; they [were] bred in this country and some attempts were made to break them in. The late Don Jaze de Menezes, son of the Marquis of Marialva [the friend of William Beckford] actually drove them in an open carriage, till they broke two or three carriages for him, and some of them had killed themselves by struggling” (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 314⁠–⁠316). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque and the aqueduct were the usual “sights” for visitors to Lisbon at this time. The latter, whose “stupendous height” filled Southey with astonishment, brought water into Lisbon from springs ten miles away, as far as Chellas, spanning a valley upon huge arches, the highest of which was over 250 feet in altitude. This structure, the Aqueducto das Aguas Livres, was built under John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> by Manuel da Maia, and so well built that it escaped injury from the earthquake. It has 127 arches in a single row, with pointed openings.</p>
					<p>Of this famous work Beckford, the author of Vathek, writes, “I sat down on a fragment of rock under the great arch and looked up at the vaulted stonework so high above me, with a sensation of awe not unallied to fear; as if the building I gazed upon was the performance of some immeasurable being endowed with gigantic strength, who might perhaps take a fancy to saunter about his work this morning, and, in mere awkwardness, crush me to atoms” (Letters, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 36). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richard Twiss, Travels through Portugal and Spain in 1772 and 2773, London, 1775.</p>
					<p>From all accounts the Lisbon of this period was dirty and unsanitary, Miss Schaw to the contrary notwithstanding. Southey says that Lisbon at the end of the eighteenth century was notorious for its dilapidation, insecurity, and dirt. “The filth of the city is indeed astonishing. Everything is thrown into the street and all the refuse of the kitchen and dead animals are exposed to the scorching sun” (page 213). And Byron⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“The dingy denizens are rear’d in dirt;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ne personage of high or mean degree</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Doth care for cleanness of surtout or shirt</span>
							<span>Though shent with Egypt’s plague, unkempt, unwash’d, unhurt.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, I, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jalousies were iron or wooden shutters, with fixed slats sloping upwards from the outside. They could, as a rule, be raised or lowered, at the will of the person within, enabling her to look out without being seen. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The portion of the city that was rebuilding was the lower town (Cidade Baixa) near the river. The Praga do Commercio, the “noble square” of the text, was the centre of its business life. From this square running back along the higher ground was the Rua Augusta, connecting it with the Praga de Dom Pedro, with its wavy pavement, called Roly-Poly Square by the British sailors. Along the Rua Augusta were the commercial houses and on the northwest corner of the Praga do Commercio, extending west along the Arsenal street, was the huge Arcenal da Marinha, which Miss Shaw wrongly locates on the Rua Augusta. (See plan of the city in Voyage en Portugal, 1789⁠–⁠1790, 1797-) In the centre of the Praga do Commercio was the equestrian statue of Joseph I, erected only the year before, from which later came the name, Black Horse Square, given by the British. On the south front of the pedestal was a bust of Pombal. This bust was removed in April, 1777, after Pombal’s fall, and the city arms in bronze substituted. It was restored in 1833. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Paisley’s house was on a corner of the Praga do Commercio. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joseph I’s eldest daughter, Maria Francesca, Princess of Brazil, married her uncle, Dom Pedro, his youngest brother. They succeeded to the throne in 1777, but as a consequence of continued inbreeding were too feebleminded to rule with any regard for the welfare of Portugal. Maria was fanatically religious and Pombal was overthrown by a combination of a court camarilla and the clerics. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The theatre was in the Rua d’os Condes, and the employment of men for the female parts aroused ridicule and disgust among French and British travellers. “Comme il est interdit,” writes the author of the Voyage en Portugal, “aux femmes depuis quelques annees de monter sur le theatre, les hommes sont obliges de jouer leur roles. Rien de plus ridicule ni de plus degoutant à la fois que de voir sous les habits d’une femme un homme a larges epaules et menton barbu,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 44). Beckford writes, “The play afforded me more disgust than amusement; the theatre is low and narrow, and the actors, for there are no actresses, below criticism. Her Majesty’s absolute commands [that is, of the former Princess of Brazil, see preceding note] having swept females off the stage, their parts are acted by calvish young fellows. Judge what pleasing effect this metamorphosis must produce, especially in the dancers, where one sees a stout shepherdess in virgin white, with a soft blue beard, clutching a nosegay in a fist that would almost have knocked down a Goliath, and a train of milkmaids attending her enormous footsteps, tossing their petticoats over their heads at every step. Such sprawling, jerking, and ogling I never saw before, and hope never to see again” (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 71⁠–⁠72). The royal opera house of Sao Carlos was not built until 1792⁠–⁠1793. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“T⁠⸺d” is manifestly Lord Townshend, in all probability George, Marquess Townshend, 1724⁠–⁠1807, who had the boys under his protection in 1776⁠–⁠1778. The identification of the others is unimportant. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is not easy to determine from the internal evidence of the narrative just how long the Lisbon visit lasted or just when the party sailed for Scotland. As nearly as can be made out the duration of the visit was somewhat less than four weeks, so that the departure could not have been earlier than the middle of January. It might have been later. In any case Miss Schaw, Fanny, the boys, and Neilson could hardly have reached Greenock before the end of the month or early in February, 1776. It is strange that in the narrative no mention is made of Christmas or New Year’s festivities, for the visit included both of these festal days. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Calendar of State Papers, Colonial, 1701, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 720⁠–⁠721; 1702, <abbr>p.</abbr> 167. The murder was a shocking affair and caused wide alarm throughout the island. Whether the “Major Samuel Martyn” of Antigua mentioned in 1698 as engaged in illicit trade and called “a great villain” by an enemy of doubtful character is our Major Samuel we cannot say. It is likely, though the charges need not be taken at their face value. Charges and counter-charges were common enough in all the colonies at that time. Nevertheless the elder Samuel would appear to have been a man of a vigorous personality and somewhat irascible temper. Ib., 1697⁠–⁠1698, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194, 195⁠–⁠197, 338 <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a letter from Jared Ingersoll to Martin in the Fitch Papers, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 131⁠–⁠134, which deals with Connecticut’s claims for repayment of expenses for provisions furnished in 1757. The letter is dated June 29, 1761. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Gentleman’s Magazine, 1805, Pt. I, 113, a correspondent sends a portrait of Martin, with the following letter: “The celebrity of Samuel Martin, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, some time secretary to the Treasury and for several years member for Camelford, and the memorable event of his duel with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes may render the annexed plate, engraved from the last portrait painted for him, an acceptable present to collectors and to those who wish to illustrate the works either of Wilkes or Churchill. It is well known that in 1772 <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Martin declined an alderman’s gown, and that he was a frequent speaker in parliament between the years 1782 and 1786 is evident from the ample notice you have taken of him in your parliamentary debates for those years.”</p>
					<p>The last part of this letter is quite incorrect, as Martin was not a freeman of the City of London and so could have had no opportunity to refuse an alderman’s gown (the person so refusing was one Joseph Martin), and he was not in parliament during the years from 1782 to 1786. The portrait reproduced in the magazine cannot be that painted by Hogarth, who died in 1764. A correspondent would hardly have called a picture painted twentyfive years before a man’s death his “last portrait.” <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In a letter to Lord George Germain, October 12, 1780 (Public Record Office, C. O. 5: 157, <abbr>p.</abbr> 395), Samuel writes: “I received very lately a letter from my brother <abbr>Gov.</abbr> Martin acquainting me that he had besought your Lordships patronage to obtain of his Majestys goodness an equitable relief for the losses he sustained by the depredations of the Rebels on the eruption of Rebellion in North Carolina, where he was then acting and he trusts doing his duty as a Governor commissioned by the King.⁠ ⁠… My brother long ago desired me to submit his case and humble petition to the King’s ministers, but I discouraged him, urging my own privacy, insignificance, and want of strength for an effectual support of such an application.” <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letters of Administration, dated June 20, 1786, and February 17, 1789, may be found among the records of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, in the Admonition Act Books for those years. Sarah, Alice, and Josiah Martin are the beneficiaries in both grants, Mary Elizabeth having renounced all claim to a share in the estate. The latter’s position at this time is not a little puzzling. In the grant of 1789 she is mentioned as “now residing at Black Rocke in North America.” Can this represent an attempt to say that she was residing at “Rockhall” in 1789? She was considerably older than the other children and had been left £200 by her grandfather, Josiah, in his will in 1773, the only one of the children to be so favored, and it is not impossible that, after the death of her mother and father, she lived with the Long Island family. Hers is the portrait painted by Copley. (Josiah’s will is in Collections, New York Historical Society, 1900, Wills, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 55.) <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Josiah was a widower when he died. That fact is stated in the letters of administration. Sarah, Alice, and Josiah Henry were all minors in 1789, that is, under the age of twenty-one. Therefore the birth of the elder, Sarah, cannot have been earlier than 1769. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the parish register of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s, Antigua, is to be found entry of the baptism of Lidia, daughter of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Josiah Martin, February 3, 1727. It is impossible to say whether this is our Josiah or not (Oliver, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 250). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is an account of “Rockhall” in Bellot’s History of the Rockaways, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 76⁠–⁠77, but it is full of inaccuracies. Its most important feature is the reproduction of an old photograph of the house as it was in 1874, showing “Quokko House,” the slave quarters, which was removed in 1881. This photograph (and others of a similar character) is in the possession of the descendants of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Hewlett. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Payson in Oliver’s Antigua, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, 441, and in New England Historical and Genealogical Register, January, 1900, says that Josiah’s wife died August 30, 1805. His evidence is the parish record of death. She is mentioned in Samuel’s will of August 13, 1802, administered in 1806. If she died in 1805, then Alice probably occupied the New York house. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In a “list of persons charged as enemies to America,” following the date June 20, 1776, appears the following:</p>
					<p>“⸻ Martin from Antigua. Dwells in Obd. Mills house opposite the Meeting House at a high rent. He associates chiefly with James Depeyster” (Force, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr>, f. 1158). We cannot identify this particular Martin. Josiah, <abbr>Jr.</abbr>, was not there at that time. The Mills house was in Jamaica. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From a pamphlet in the British Museum, entitled An Account of the late dreadful Hurricane which happened on the 31st August, 1772, we learn that “Olivees” was the property of Peter Mathew Mills, son of Mathew Mills of <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher, who died in 1753. The latter’s name is entered on the map of Basseterre and its surroundings as the owner of a plantation, which is probably “Olivees.” If so, the sister who allowed the Hamiltons to occupy the plantation, rent free, must have been Peter Mathew Mills’s wife, so that Mills and Hamilton would be brothers-in-law. We have not been able, however, to establish the connection. The first name of Mills’s wife was Catherine, but her family name is unknown. As Mills and his wife were living in London at the time of the Hamiltons’ marriage, they might well have turned over the plantation in <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher to the newly wedded pair. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Public Record Office is an autograph letter from Hamilton to Governor Burt regarding the capture of two vessels with Danish property, in which is enclosed an extract of a letter from the principal owner “earnestly asking his friendship in getting these brigantines clear” and adding “there will be £200 sterling at your service, <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr>, £100 each.” To this Hamilton replied that no temptation would ever influence him to betray the public trust bestowed on him (C. O. 152:58). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was William Bingham, in 1778 American agent at <abbr>St.</abbr> Pierre, Martinique (Journals of Congress, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, 837; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, 147, 150, 153), afterwards senator from Pennsylvania, who died at Bath, England, in 1803. His daughter married Lord Ashburton. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1779 Governor Burt said of Hamilton, “I have in many years been intimately acquainted with him. His Majesty has not in all his dominions a subject more firmly attached⁠ ⁠… a more steady warm and zealous promoter of his service or one who would with more cheerfulness stake life and fortune for <abbr>H. M.</abbr> against all the factions set on foot by the Gallo-American party.” In a later letter he adds that Hamilton was a considerable sufferer from the loyal part he had taken, losing in a few years near £15,000 sterling (C. O. 152:60). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Causeways, they call them.” <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Wimble was the author of a Chart of his Majesty’s Province of North Carolina, which was engraved and printed according to act of parliament in 1738. It was sold by Mount &amp; Page in London and by “the author in Boston, New England.” On this map Wilmington is represented as a much larger town than Brunswick, perhaps with intent. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The exact location of this plantation seems to be unknown. In his marriage settlement Corbin describes his own property as a half acre of land and a wharf in Edenton, and Strawberry Island near Edenton, with houses, outhouses, and improvements. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dillard identifies this island with the present John Island. Perhaps the plantation referred to was there, but the identification is far from certain. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1760 Corbin made a deed leaving the Cupola House to his prospective wife, Jean Innes, and after her death to his natural heirs. It went eventually to his brother, Edward Corbin (North Carolina Booklet, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>, 205⁠–⁠217). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In October, 1761, he is spoken of as “late of Chowan County,” so that he must have left the Albemarle region before that date (Register’s Office, Conveyances, E, 88⁠–⁠94). His marriage was solemnized shortly afterwards. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That Thomas Rutherfurd was John’s brother appears from the latter’s letter, dated March 16, 1782, from Charles Town, mentioning the death of his brother Thomas, and saying that he was now caring for his widow and children. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1735 Governor Johnston traveled from Cape Fear to Edenton “with his equipage and family,” and in 1737 was occupying his own plantation on Salmon Creek across the Chowan River from Edenton. It is known that the governor had two natural children, Henry, who died in 1772, and Caroline, who was probably demented or at least weak-minded. It may be that these constituted the “family” referred to. Penelope Galland had married, first, William Maule, who died in 1726; second, John Lovick, who died in 1734; third, George Phenney, who died in 1737; and some time after that date, Governor Johnston, to whom we know she was married in 1741, for Hatheway prints a deed of that year signed by both of them (North Carolina Historical and Genealogical Register, I, 54). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Miss” was undoubtedly Penelope Johnston, daughter of the governor by Penelope Galland. She must have been at this time about fourteen or fifteen years old. In his will (Grimes, 269⁠–⁠271) the governor mentions his daughter and earnestly requests his “dearest wife” to be a kind mother to his “dear little girl,” then (1751) perhaps ten or eleven. He left her a bequest of lands and negroes, but did not include her among those who had a share in the residuary estate. But on the death of Henry Johnston in 1772, she fell heir to his fifth share of that estate and was engaged for many years in endeavoring to secure an accounting of her portion. She married John Dawson, who died before her, and she was still living, as the widow Dawson, in 1798. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the manuscripts in the possession of the North Carolina Historical Commission is an “Account of John Rutherfurd and Frances his wife with the Estate of Governor Gabriel Johnston,” which covers the years 1752 to 1756. It was sworn to before James Murray, J. P., February 10, 1756, and is signed by Rutherfurd and his wife. Its later pages contain accounts of money disbursed for Eden House, Mount Galland, and Fishing Creek plantations, with items regarding Henry Johnston, Caroline or Carey, his sister, and Penelope (education at Williamsburg = f83. 16. 6). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On September <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1767, Laurens wrote to Rutherfurd: “Yesterday I called upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Saxby and received from him the sum of three thousand one hundred and fifty-seven pounds of this currency, equal to four hundred and fifty-one pounds sterling, on account of the king’s warrant,” and after stating that he could obtain no more at the time, adds: “I must be content to receive balances from him just when and in such quantities as he shall be pleased to pay to me. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Saxby asked me what you intended to do further in this affair and hoped you would not ‘start’ before him in any representation on the other side of the water, adding that he would forfeit his head if you received the balance due on the warrant in ten years to come. I answered that I knew your generosity and would be surety that you would take no unfair advantages, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” (Laurens Letter Book, 1767⁠–⁠1771, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3⁠–⁠4). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The terms of this settlement may be found in the register’s office, Wilmington, Conveyances, F, 3⁠–⁠4. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the letter to William Adair of Pall Mall, March 26, 1773, Rutherfurd speaks of “my young family now on your side of the water for their education.” <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Walter Rutherfurd loaned John Rutherfurd, Jr., $2,000, on November 9, 1790, and took as his security a mortgage on half the North Carolina lands (Register’s Office, Conveyances, Y, 259⁠–⁠262). John was in New York at the time. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Family Records and Events, by Livingston Rutherfurd, <abbr>p.</abbr> 122, “Edgerston Manor” is stated to have been located in Hunterdon county. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the career of the Boyne, see Anson, Life of John Jervis, Admiral <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 88⁠–⁠107. Rutherfurd’s appointment is dated January 9, 1794. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There are many letters of this period from Captain Rutherfurd to Evan Nepean, secretary to the Admiralty Board, among the Admiralty Papers in the Public Record Office (Admiralty 1:2398⁠–⁠2408), but they throw little light on his personal affairs. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Rutherfurds of that Ilk and their Cadets. Edinburgh, 1884. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In a letter of September 2, 1802, he speaks of his own health as “much impaired” (Adm. 1:2405). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Claudius Beresford was a banker of Dublin, doing business, in Beresford Place until 1810, and, as Beresford &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, in Henry Street after that date. He became prominent in the municipal life of Dublin about l8i5» was alderman for twenty-five years, and served his term as lord mayor. He removed from Dublin probably soon after 1841, first to Coleraine, then to Port Stewart, and finally to Glenamoyle, Londonderry county, where he died July 2, 1846. He had married Fanny’s daughter sometime before 1805, but she died before 1839 and was buried in the parish church of Coleraine. The Beresfords had seven children, two sons and five daughters. The sons were John C., Jr., and Archibald. Of the daughters, Catherine married one Smyley, who died before 1847, at which date she was living with two children, John and William, at Ramsey, Isle of Man; Emily married in 1839 George Cairnes (or Henry Moore Cairnes; one name is given in the will and the other in a codicil; perhaps they were brothers) and was at first dispossessed by her father for having “wantonly and foolishly involved him in heavy debts” through “foolish extravagance”; but she was later restored to favor as having “already been sufficiently punished by the privations she suffered from a restricted income.” The other daughters were Georgina, Constantia, and Kitty (Royal Calendar, passim; Prerogative Wills, Public Record Office, Ireland). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At this time the children were obtaining compensation from the American Loyalist Claims Commission. On March 16, 1782, John Rutherfurd, Sr., when in Charles Town had drawn up a memorial of losses addressed to Lord George Germain, but died before he was able to deliver it. In 1784, the sons presented this memorial with another of their own and in consequence of their appeal and statement of losses were allowed compensation to the amount of £500 a year (instead of £600 asked for), a sum that was later reduced to £50, because, as the decision stated, “they had obtained a restoration of a part of their property and so had enough to live on” (Audit Office Papers). It is not clear just what property is here referred to. Even this allowance of £50 was withdrawn after January 5, 1791 (Loyalist Quarterly Pension Books). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The above account of the controversy over the arrears of Johnston’s salary is based in large part upon the text of the award, contained in a document now in private hands. The controversy itself throws light on Rutherfurd’s business methods and is interesting as showing that the Johnston estate was not finally settled for nearly half a century after the governor’s death.</p>
					<p>In McRee’s Life of Iredell is printed a reference to this award in a letter from Samuel Johnston to Iredell, as follows, “By the last packet I received a letter from our cousin, James Ferrier, dated <abbr>Nov.</abbr>, 1798. He is promoted to the rank of Major General in the army. He informs me that the dispute between my uncle’s legatees and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rutherfurd’s children had been left to arbitration⁠—to two merchants of London, who had awarded that they had received considerably more than their share of our uncle’s legacy and effects; and that the moneys in the hands of Anderson’s executors (including what was received in England) should be divided among the other legatees.” <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 545 <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This son, Alexander Schaw, who died in 1802, left one child, Catherine Schaw, as we learn from the will of her uncle, Alexander Schaw, Sr., who died at Inveresk, Scotland, leaving property to the amount of £7,500. According to that will the son of Alexander, Sr., John Sauchie Schaw, was to succeed to the property. Should he die, however, before the father and there be no heirs of his body, then Catherine, the niece, was to be the heir, and should she not be living, then the estate was to be divided equally between John Rutherfurd and William Gordon Rutherfurd, Schaw’s brothers-in-law (Commissary Court Books, Edinburgh). As it turned out John Sauchie Schaw inherited the property. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The method of paying for this house is interesting (Audit Office, Class 13, 118), as no money actually passed from Cobham to Moore.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>To amount of account due by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to Cobham and Tucker</td>
								<td>120. 10.0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To Tucker’s physical account paid him</td>
								<td>39. 0.2</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To cash from Estate of Thomas Jones</td>
								<td>11. 10.0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To account paid by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> J. Moore on account of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Samuel Swan</td>
								<td>40. 0.0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To cash paid John Ancrum (June 14, 1775)</td>
								<td>304. 4.8</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To cash paid John Ancrum on account of tar (July 24).</td>
								<td>125. 0.0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To cash paid John Ancrum for a horse and lumber (<abbr>Jan.</abbr>, 1776)</td>
								<td>78. 0.0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To cash paid John Ancrum</td>
								<td>100. 0.0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To Cobham &amp; Tucker’s acct, <abbr>Jan.</abbr>, 1775-<abbr>Feb.</abbr> 16, 1776</td>
								<td>9 .3.6</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>To cash in part of Cobham’s ace* for medicines and attendance July, 1776-<abbr>Nov.</abbr>, 1778</td>
								<td>12.11.8</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>£840. 0.0</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>
						<a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For his later career see Battle, in James Sprunt Historical Monographs, no. 3, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13⁠–⁠16. Battle is wrong in calling James a cousin of Robert’s; he was his brother. <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“We hear that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Knight is raising men in Currituck to subdue the Edenton Committee and to force open trade for the laudable purpose of paying his debts.” Cogdell to Samuel Johnston, New Bern, June 18, 1775 (Hayes Collection). <a href="appendices.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
